Pinned Nikki Haley holds rally in South Carolina after losing Iowa, New Hampshire primaries Nikki Haley held a rally in her home state of South Carolina Wednesday, giving no indication of backing down after back-to-back GOP primary losses in Iowa and New Hampshire. Addressing the crowd, Haley framed the election as a choice between “more of the same” and “going forward.” “More of the same,” Haley said, includes both Trump and Biden. Haley accused Trump of throwing a “temper tantrum” after his Tuesday night victory, in which he repeatedly insulted her in a speech far angrier than his remarks after his Iowa victory. Haley also hit back at critics who have urged her to drop out of the race, saying there were dozens of states left to go. “The political elites in this state and around the country have said that we just need to let Donald Trump have this. Listen, we’ve only had two states that have voted. We got 48 more that deserve to vote,” Haley said. “A presidential candidate has to get 1,215. Donald Trump has 32 and I have 17. So, we are not going to sit there and just give up.” The Wednesday night event serves two purposes for Haley. It's a welcome-home gathering for the South Carolina resident and an opener for her campaign in the first-in-the-South GOP voting state, which has historically been influential in determining the party's nominee. Since 1980, only one winner of South Carolina's Republican balloting has lost the nomination. Posted by Bradford Betz Share

Sen. John Kennedy endorses Trump, says primaries are ‘over’ Sen. John Kennedy, R-La., is formally throwing his support behind Donald Trump for the Republican nomination in the 2024 presidential race. “Competition makes us all better, so I let the primary play out, but this thing’s over,” Kennedy tweeted Wednesday, following Trump’s win in the GOP New Hampshire primary. “It’s going to be Pres. Trump versus Pres. Biden: A choice between hope and more hurt. It’s not even close. I choose hope. I am endorsing Pres. Trump and look forward to working with him.” Despite her second loss, following another defeat in Iowa last week, GOP candidate Nikki Haley has vowed to stay in the race, even with the prospect looming of an embarrassing home-state primary defeat in South Carolina on Feb. 24. "New Hampshire is first in the nation. It is not last in the nation," Haley declared before leaving Tuesday night. "This race is far from over. There are dozens of states left to go." Posted by Bradford Betz Share

Mickey Mouse, Jason Kelce, Michelle Obama among write-in names on New Hampshire primary ballot Donald Trump and Joe Biden easily sailed to their respective party’s nomination in Tuesday night’s New Hampshire primary. Still, a few write-in names have raised eyebrows. Among the list in the Nashua Ward were retiring Philadelphia Eagles center Jason Kelce, Disney mascot Mickey Mouse, and Michelle Obama, the former First Lady and wife to former President Barack Obama. Other honorable write-ins included “ceasefire now,” former Minnesota Governor and wrestler Jesse Ventura, Rolling Stones guitarist Keith Richards, and California Gov. Gavin Newsom. Posted by Bradford Betz Share

Nikki Haley thanks New Hampshire after GOP primary loss to Trump, heads to South Carolina for rally Nikki Haley thanked New Hampshire after losing the state’s GOP primary to Donald Trump. Despite losing Iowa and New Hampshire, she has vowed to yield the 2024 Republican nomination to Trump. Haley did perform better in Tuesday's New Hampshire primary than she had in the Iowa caucuses a week earlier, where she finished third, well behind Trump and only slightly down from Florida Gov. Ron DeSantis, who has since shuttered his campaign. Haley now heads to her home state of South Carolina for a Wednesday evening rally. The event serves as both a welcome-home gathering and an opener for her campaign in the first-in-the-South GOP voting state, which has historically been influential in determining the party's nominee. Since 1980, only one winner of South Carolina's Republican balloting has lost the nomination. Posted by Bradford Betz Share

'Jarring' New Hampshire results should be 'warning sign' for Trump, says Thiessen Former President Trump on Tuesday secured a double-digit victory in the New Hampshire primary with 54.55% of the vote compared to runner-up Nikki Haley's 43.2%. Fox News contributor Marc Thiessen explained Wednesday on "FOX & Friends" that the margin is "jarring" and represents a warning sign for Trump ahead of a possible rematch with President Biden. MARC THIESSEN: He's effectively the quasi-Republican incumbent. He never ceded the leadership of the Republican Party . He's offended that anyone challenged him for the Republican nomination. He thinks he should be the nominee. The last time you had a challenge like this to a Republican incumbent was in 1992, when Pat Buchanan challenged George H.W. Bush. He got 38% to Bush's 52%. The New York Times headline was ‘Bush jarred in first primary. President Bush scored a less than impressive victory over Pat Buchanan.' Haley did much better than Buchanan ever did. Why is this not jarring? You just showed the stats.Thirty-five percent of Republicans in the state are not going to vote for Donald Trump. He's bleeding centrists. He needs those Haley voters, and right now, a lot of the Republican Party and independents are saying they're not going to vote for him. So it's a warning sign. To read more from this interview click here. Posted by Bradford Betz Share

Pro-Palestinian protesters dragged out of Biden’s UAW speech, get shouted down by workers Pro-Palestinian protesters were dragged out of a United Auto Workers convention hall Wednesday as President Biden was addressing the workers. Midway through his speech, several protesters interrupted shouting pro-Palestinian slogans. Biden carried on with his speech as the protesters were drowned out by the crowd shouting: “U-A-W!” The president had been picking up an endorsement by the powerful union, as he pushed to shore up the support of blue-collar workers. Later, Biden’s motorcade encountered more pro-Palestinian protesters yelling for a ceasefire as it approached the White House. It was the second day in a row that Biden was interrupted by pro-Palestinian protesters. On Tuesday, at least a dozen protesters disrupted an abortion rights rally in Manassas, Virginia as Biden and Vice President Kamala Harris were giving a talk. Posted by Bradford Betz Share

UAW president endorses Biden, claims Trump 'doesn't care about the American worker' The United Auto Workers endorsed President Biden on Wednesday as the Democrat incumbent battles against former President Donald Trump for support from key labor groups. Biden, who notably stood on the UAW picket line in Michigan back in the fall during their strike against Ford, General Motors and Stellantis, was invited to speak to the union on Wednesday." Joe Biden bet on the American worker, while Donald Trump blamed the American worker," UAW President Shawn Fain claimed as the group caps its three-day gathering in Washington, D.C., to map out its political priorities. "We need to know who's going to sit in the most powerful seat in the world and us win as a united working class. So if our endorsements must be earned. Joe Biden has earned it," Fain said. This is an excerpt from a report by Fox Business' Danielle Wallace. Posted by Bradford Betz Share

Susan Collins not backing Trump in 2024 race Sen. Susan Collins, R-Maine, says she will not endorse Donald Trump even if he were to become the Republican nominee in the 2024 presidential race. Asked by The Hill whether she would support Trump following his win in New Hampshire Collins said: “I do not at this point.” Collins said she was pleased former U.N. Ambassador Nikki Haley was determined to stay in the race, despite her loss in Tuesday’s New Hampshire primary by 11 points. “I’m glad to hear last night that Nikki Haley is determined to stay in [the race],” Collins said. “I think the more people see of her, particularly since she appears to be the only alternative to Donald Trump right now, the more impressed they will be.” But the Maine Senator stopped short of formally endorsing Haley. Haley’s team vowed on Wednesday to continue fighting Trump for the GOP nomination, even with the prospect looming of an embarrassing home-state primary defeat in South Carolina on Feb. 24. Posted by Bradford Betz Share

Sens. Deb Fischer and John Cornyn endorse Trump GOP Sens. John Cornyn and Deb Fischer endorsed former President Trump on Tuesday night following Trump's win in the New Hampshire primary in his bid to be crowned the Republican presidential nominee. "It's time for Republicans to unite around President Donald Trump and make Joe Biden a one-term president," Fischer said in a statement. "These last three years have yielded a crippling border crisis, an inflationary economy that prices the American Dream out of reach for families, and a world in constant turmoil with our enemies on the march. I endorse Donald Trump for president so we can secure our border, get our economy moving again, and keep America safe." Cornyn said in a statement posted to X, "To beat Biden, Republicans need to unite around a single candidate, and it’s clear that President Trump is Republican voters’ choice." "Four more years of failed domestic policies like the Biden Border Crisis and record-high inflation, and failed foreign policies that have emboldened our adversaries and made the world a more dangerous place, must be stopped," he said. Cornyn and Fischer join more than 15 GOP senators in endorsing Trump, including Sens. JD Vance of Ohio, Marsha Blackburn of Tennessee, Rick Scott of Florida, Josh Hawley and Eric Schmitt of Missouri, Tom Cotton of Arkansas, Lindsey Graham of South Carolina, Tommy Tuberville of Alabama, Marco Rubio of Florida and others. This report is an excerpt from an article by Fox News' Jamie Joseph Posted by Anders Hagstrom Share

Trump calls out Nikki Haley after NH primary: ‘Did very poorly’ Fox News’ Bryan Llenas reported on the race for the 2024 Republican presidential nomination after former President Trump’s victory in New Hampshire on Wednesday. Llenas highlighted comments from Trump blasting former South Carolina Gov. Nikki Haley for her performance in the contest, saying she did "very poorly." Haley took home 43% of the vote, compared to Trump's 54%. Posted by Anders Hagstrom Share

Voters share top running mate choices for Trump if elected: 'It has to be someone younger' Voters in New Hampshire shared who they'd like to see as former President Trump's running mate for the 2024 election. "It has to be someone younger, a lot younger," Kate from Maine told Fox News. "He’s old. [President] Biden’s old. The number two is really important in this election." Biden, 81, is the oldest sitting president to serve, while Trump, 77, previously held the record. "It really doesn’t matter to me, but as long as it's somebody who supports the main person, then that's most important," Irene from Massachusetts said of Trump's potential running mate. But Michael, from Arkansas, said the future president needs "the Lord God" at his side. "Our president is gonna need our Lord God by him," Michael said. "He's gonna have another battle on his hands trying to fix our country. It's so far gone." This report is an excerpt from an article by Fox News' Megan Myers and Ramiro Vargas Posted by Anders Hagstrom Share

Voters give real-time reactions to Trump, Haley speeches Pollster Lee Carter Joined Fox News to describe how voters responded to post-primary speeches by Nikki Haley and Donald Trump on Wednesday. Trump carried the New Hampshire primary by a sizeable margin Tuesday night, securing 54% of the vote to Haley's 43%. Nevertheless, Haley has vowed to stay in the race through the upcoming South Carolina primary. Posted by Anders Hagstrom Share

Nikki Haley showed 'stunningly bad judgment' in speech after New Hampshire loss, says Steve Hilton "The Next Revolution" host Steve Hilton called out Nikki Haley Tuesday night for her response to former President Trump's primary win in New Hampshire and her decision to use her post-race speech to attack the GOP frontrunner "more aggressively" than ever before. "She wants to go to South Carolina, a state where she's miles behind Donald Trump, currently 20, 30, 40 points behind Donald Trump. She needs to persuade Republicans who currently support Trump to switch to her. So what did she do in that speech tonight? Attack Donald Trump more aggressively than she's ever done before? It is stunningly bad judgment. It makes me think, actually, she knows she's going to lose," Hilton said. Fox News projected Trump would win the Granite State primary just a few minutes after the final polls closed in New Hampshire. The win, however, did not land a knockout blow in the Republican presidential race after Haley vowed to keep on fighting. "You’ve all heard the chatter among the political class. They’re falling all over themselves saying this race is over. Well, I have news for all of them: New Hampshire is first in the nation. It is not last in the nation. This race is far from over," Haley stressed as she spoke to supporters after the contest was quickly called for Trump. For Haley, a former two-term South Carolina governor who served as U.N. ambassador in the Trump administration, New Hampshire was seen as her best and possibly last chance to slow down or derail the former president's march towards renomination. Posted by Anders Hagstrom Share

RNC chair McDaniel tells Fox News 'we need to unite' around Trump Republican National Committee Chairwoman Ronna McDaniel has stayed neutral since the very start of the 2024 GOP presidential nomination race. While McDaniel and the national party committee are still not taking sides in the 2024 battle between former President Trump and former U.N. ambassador and former South Carolina Gov. Nikki Haley, the RNC chairwoman appears to be sending a signal. "I’m looking at the math and the path going forward, and I don’t see it for Nikki Haley," McDaniel told anchors Bret Baier and Martha MacCallum in a Fox News Channel interview late on Tuesday night. "I think she’s run a great campaign, but I do think there is a message that’s coming out from the voters, which is very clear," McDaniel emphasized. She urged that "we need to unite around our eventual nominee, which is going to be Donald Trump, and we need to make sure we beat Joe Biden." Posted by Anders Hagstrom Share

People aren't enthusiastic about Joe Biden: Rep. Michael Waltz Rep. Michael Waltz, R-Fla., joined Fox News to discuss former President Trump's New Hampshire primary victory on Wednesday, as well as President Biden's reelection chances. Waltz argued that independent and even Democratic voters are not enthusiastic about voting for Biden in the upcoming election. Polls have shown that an overwhelming majority of Independents and even Democrats believe Biden is too old to effectively serve a second term. Waltz also discussed Biden's alleged failures overseas and demanded that the Biden administration offer a briefing on the recent death of two U.S. Navy SEALs. Posted by Anders Hagstrom Share

Nikki Haley has become the candidate for moderates and anti-Trump voters: Josh Kraushaar Former Trump senior adviser Kellyanne Conway, Fox News Radio political analyst Josh Kraushaar, and Fox News senior political analyst Juan Williams provided analysis of the New Hampshire primary results on Wednesday. Kraushaar argues Haley's coalition of moderate and anti-Trump voters won't be enough to get her a victory in more conservative states like South Carolina. Posted by Anders Hagstrom Share

Biden challenger Dean Phillips attends New Hampshire Trump rally, rips divisive political culture Democratic presidential candidate Dean Phillips, who secured around 20% of the vote in the New Hampshire primary, described his experience attending a Trump rally in the Granite State. When "Fox & Friends" co-host Steve Doocy asked him about his decision to connect with Trump supporters, Rep. Phillips highlighted the importance of bipartisanship in the 2024 election, noting it was his "responsibility" to reach out to voters who might be voting for another candidate. "That's my responsibility, and I'm sick of this political culture that only rewards dividers," Phillips, D-Minn., said Wednesday. "I flipped a district that had been Republican for 60 years in 2018. I didn't do so by just pandering to Democrats. I invited independents and Republicans. I'm the second most bipartisan member of Congress for a reason." "I have great friendships with both sides of the aisle. Any leader of the free world should show up and the other side's rally and say hello and greet people, and I got to tell you, I spoke with 50," he continued. "They were the most hospitable, thoughtful, kind people I've interacted with in a long time. Yesterday at the polls, I said hello to everybody holding signs. Biden signs, Williamson signs, my signs. Trump signs, Haley signs. People were so decent and I would call it anger-tainment. Anger-tainment would have us believe we are so much more divided than we are." Biden won the New Hampshire primary election decisively against Phillips and Marianne Williamson on Tuesday night. Biden secured more than 50% of the vote in a write-in campaign since his name did not appear on the ballot. This report is an excerpt from an article by Fox News' Bailee Hill Posted by Anders Hagstrom Share

Haley allies admit she has 'steeper road ahead' facing Trump in South Carolina Americans for Prosperity Action, the political wing of the influential and deep-pocketed fiscally conservative network founded by the billionaire Koch Brothers, admitted that GOP presidential candidate Nikki Haley has a "steeper road ahead" facing former President Trump in South Carolina. Reacting after Trump clinched his second straight victory in the New Hampshire primaries Tuesday, Americans for Prosperity Action Senior Advisor Emily Seidel said the results in New Hampshire "show that Nikki Haley is closing the gap and that she is the clear alternative for voters who are ready to close the book on the toxic Biden-Trump political era." "This is still an uphill battle. Now all eyes turn to South Carolina, where she has a steeper road ahead," Seidel said in a statement obtained by Fox News Digital. "For the past several months, we’ve been engaged in races for the U.S. House, U.S. Senate, and presidential levels to prevent a scenario where one party progressive rule comes to Washington, D.C. at a time when our country can least afford it. If Republicans nominate Donald Trump, we risk a repeat of the past three elections and the very real threat of full progressive control increases dramatically." Seidal went on to say of Trump, "This is why Joe Biden and the Democrats want him to be the nominee. The stakes for our country simply couldn’t be higher." "Our teams will continue talking to South Carolina voters in support of Nikki Haley. We are laser focused on electing the candidates who can be the firewall preventing one party progressive rule of the federal government. We have three ways to win the Senate, the House, and the presidential primary. Through our multi-pronged effort we are prepared to get this done. I'm proud of our activists' ongoing efforts. Despite challenging conditions, their support shows that AFP Action consistently takes principled and tough action when our country needs it most." This is an excerpt from a report by Fox News' Danielle Wallace Posted by Anders Hagstrom Share

Trump and Biden agree on one thing about the Republican primary after New Hampshire Former President Donald Trump and President Biden don't agree on much — but both say their election rematch is set after convincing wins in New Hampshire's first-in-the-nation primary. Trump, who faces one remaining primary challenger in former U.N. Ambassador Nikki Haley, claimed an 11-point victory in the Granite State on Tuesday night. In an exclusive interview with Fox News Digital, Trump said he was "very honored by the result" and is "looking forward to going against the worst president in the history of our country." Biden said Tuesday the "stakes could not be higher" after winning the New Hampshire primary as a write-in candidate, trouncing Rep. Dean Phillips, D-Minn., who launched a long-shot bid against the incumbent president by arguing Biden is too old and unpopular to win in November. "It is now clear that Donald Trump will be the Republican nominee," Biden declared in a statement. "And my message to the country is the stakes could not be higher. Our Democracy. Our personal freedoms — from the right to choose to the right to vote. Our economy — which has seen the strongest recovery in the world since COVID. All are at stake." This report is an excerpt from an article by Fox News' Chris Pandolfo Posted by Anders Hagstrom Share

Sen. Tim Scott urges Republicans to support Trump: 'This race is already over' Former presidential candidate Sen. Tim Scott, R-S.C., joined 'Fox & Friends' to explain why he threw his support behind former President Trump instead of Nikki Haley on Wednesday. Scott argued that Trump has already proven he is capable of lowering inflation and addressing illegal immigration, two top issues for Republicans and Americans in general. He went on to say that the outcome of the GOP primary is a foregon conclusion with Trump's sizeable lead over Haley. Posted by Anders Hagstrom Share

Gov. Sununu slams political ‘elitists’ rallying behind ‘weakest candidate’ Trump New Hampshire Gov. Chris Sununu joined Fox News on Wednesday and expressed his optimism over Nikki Haley’s performance in the state's primary. While Haley lost to former President Trump, she secured a over 43% of the vote, compared to Trump's 54%. Her surge in the polls came thanks to Florida Gov. Ron DeSantis' withdrawal from the race on Sunday. Sununu argued that Haley is the best choice for Republicans looking to defeat President Biden in the general election. He argued that Trump's candidacy is a product of "political elitests" in the Republican Party. Posted by Anders Hagstrom Share

Record voter turnout led to Trump victory in New Hampshire primary Fox News projected Trump would win the New Hampshire primary just a few minutes after the final polls closed. The primary saw record turnout despite some predictions that low energy among voters would depress the vote. Trump told Fox News Digital that he was "very honored" by the support he received from voters, and declared that the Republican Party was "very united" behind his candidacy. When asked if he felt Haley would suspend her campaign, he said, "I don’t know. She should." "She should because, otherwise, we have to keep wasting money instead of spending on Biden," Trump said. "If she doesn’t drop out, we have to waste money instead of spending it on Biden, which is our focus." Haley has nevertheless vowed to continue her campaign through the upcoming South Carolina primary. She served as governor of the state for two terms before joining President Trump's administration as U.S. Ambassador to the U.N. Fox News' Brooke Singman contributed to this report Posted by Anders Hagstrom Share

Dean Phillips says Democrats need to ‘wake up’ to ‘impending disaster' after NH loss 2024 Democratic presidential candidate Dean Phillips. D-Minn., reacted to his performance in the New Hampshire primary election and discussed his bid for the White House on Wednesday. Phillips secured just under 20% of the vote in the New Hampshire primary. Biden, whose name did not officially appear on the ballot, secured over 51% of the vote via a write-in campaign. Phillips argued that most of the country "would rather see a Nikki Haley versus Dean Phillips matchup" than former President Trump versus Biden. Polls throughout the past 12 months have shown that many Americans would favor younger candidates. Posted by Anders Hagstrom Share

Conservatives blast Biden as 'election denier' after he calls McAuliffe the 'real' governor of VA President Joe Biden was slammed by conservatives on social media and called an "election denier" after he referred to Terry McAuliffe, who lost the Virginia gubernatorial election to the current GOP governor Glenn Youngkin, as the commonwealth’s "real" governor. "Hello, Virginia, and the real governor, Terry McAuliffe," Biden told a crowd in Virginia on Tuesday night in an event with VP Kamala Harris discussing abortion access. "My name is Joe Biden. I'm Jill Biden's husband and Kamala's running mate. Kidding aside. Thank you, Kamala, for your leadership protecting reproductive freedom and for so much more that you do." Biden, who has centered his campaign on criticizing former President Trump's 2020 election denial, was quickly criticized by conservatives for the comment. "I was informed that denying election results is the biggest threat to our democracy," conservative influence LibsofTikTok posted on X. "Start the impeachment hearings!" "Sounds like Biden should be removed from the Virginia ballot," conservative commentator Chris Barron posted on X, referencing Democrat efforts to keep former President Trump off the ballot for "election denial." Biden is shuttled across the river to promote nine-month, taxpayer-funded elective abortion-on-demand — and tosses in some casual election denialism while he’s at it," Fox News contributor Guy Benson posted on X. Fox News' Andrew Mark Miller contributed to this report Posted by Anders Hagstrom Share

Immigration was top issue among GOP New Hampshire voters Fox New contributor and former acting ICE Director Tom Homan joined Fox News on Wednesday to discuss polls showing that immigration was the single most important issue for New Hampshire Republicans headed to the polls on Tuesday. Homan also discussed the ways he believes President Biden could easily solve the immigration crisis while in office. Posted by Anders Hagstrom Share

Nancy Mace predicts Trump will 'win big' in South Carolina as eight SC leaders endorse his campaign Rep. Nancy Mace, R-S.C., joined 'Fox & Friends First' to discuss why she believes Trump will win significantly in the South Carolina primary election and the importance of banding together to defeat President Biden. Mace referenced eight major endorsements Trump has received from South Carolina Republicans, including her own. Senators Lindsey Graham and Tim Scott, both from South Carolina, have also thrown their weight behind Trump. Posted by Anders Hagstrom Share

Nikki Haley vows to stay in presidential race after New Hampshire loss to Trump Washington Examiner reporter Samantha-Jo Roth joined Fox News on Wednesday morning to discuss Nikki Haley's campaign after Trump won the New Hampshire primary and polls put her behind the former president in South Carolina. Haley has vowed to stay in the race, saying she is now focused on her "Sweet South Carolina." Haley served as governor of South Carolina for two terms before joining President Trump's administration as U.S. Ambassador to the U.N. Posted by Anders Hagstrom Share

Media urges Biden to stay in basement after New Hampshire primary: Concha Fox News contributor Joe Concha joined 'Fox & Friends First' to discuss his reaction to the media's coverage of the New Hampshire results and why he doesn't see a path forward for Nikki Haley. Concha argued that left-leaning media outlets are now hoping Biden will stay out of the spotlight after winning in New Hampshire. Biden made a series of gaffes both leading up to and following his win in the state. Concha also weighed in on Haley's position, saying he did not see a way for her to beat former President Trump. Trump secured 54% of the vote to Haley's 43%. Posted by Anders Hagstrom Share

Haley lives to fight another day against Trump, but faces 'challenging road' ahead in GOP primary Donald Trump won again, but the former president didn't land a knockout blow in New Hampshire's Republican presidential primary, as his last remaining major rival in the GOP nomination race vowed to keep on fighting. "You’ve all heard the chatter among the political class. They’re falling all over themselves saying this race is over. Well, I have news for all of them: New Hampshire is first in the nation. It is not last in the nation. This race is far from over," Nikki Haley stressed, as she spoke to supporters after the New Hampshire race was quickly called for Trump. The former two-term South Carolina governor who later served as U.N. ambassador in the Trump administration now heads back to her home state, which on Feb. 24 holds the next major contest in the Republican nominating calendar. A rally Wednesday night in Charleston is the first in a series scheduled over the coming days. And the campaign said they're launching a new $4 million ad blitz in South Carolina this week. Trump, in an interview with Fox News Digital's Brooke Singman, argued that it was time for Haley to suspend her campaign, so he could begin targeting President Biden in what's expected to be a general election rematch. Fox News' Paul Steinhauser contributed to this report Posted by Anders Hagstrom Share

Democrats take aim at Trump after New Hampshire victory: 'Same extreme agenda' Democrats reacted to former President Trump winning the New Hampshire GOP primary election over former South Carolina Governor Nikki Haley, calling his supporters the "anti-freedom MAGA movement." Trump defeated Haley Tuesday night, winning the New Hampshire Republican primary as he vies for the 2024 GOP presidential nomination. Fox News Decision Desk projected Trump's victory just minutes after the final polls closed in the Granite State. While some Republicans celebrated Trump's victory, Democrats shared their hot takes on social media, taking aim at Trump's victory. Biden's campaign manager Julie Chavez Rodriguez released a statement on Trump's win in New Hampshire, saying Tuesday night's "results confirm Donald Trump has all but locked up the GOP nomination, and the election denying, anti-freedom MAGA movement has completed its takeover of the Republican Party." "Trump is offering Americans the same extreme agenda that has cost Republicans election after election: promising to undermine American democracy, reward the wealthy on the backs of the middle class, and ban abortion nationwide," Chavez Rodriguez said. "Joe Biden sees things differently. He's fighting to grow our economy for the middle-class, strengthen our democracy, and protect the rights of every single American," she continued. "While we work toward November 2024, one thing is increasingly clear today: Donald Trump is headed straight into a general election matchup where he'll face the only person to have ever beaten him at the ballot box: Joe Biden." Fox News' Houston Keene contributed to this report Posted by Anders Hagstrom Share

Fox News Voter Analysis: Biden easily carries New Hampshire’s unofficial primary President Biden easily won the New Hampshire Democratic primary , carrying the traditional first-in-the-nation primary by 39 points over Rep. Dean Phillips. Biden’s comfortable win was more notable because his name did not actually appear on the primary ballot, forcing his supporters to write him in as their preference. The election was technically an "unsanctioned" primary, as it was held despite the Democratic National Committee’s insistence that South Carolina hold the first Democratic primary this year. New Hampshire Democrats went ahead anyway, following a state law requiring the nominating contest be the first in a given calendar year. As a result, the DNC announced no delegates would be awarded based on the New Hampshire results. Biden’s team announced in late October he would not participate, meaning he would not be on the ballot and instead be a "write-in" candidate only. Phillips campaigned heavily in the Granite State but was unable to make significant inroads. The results of the Fox News Voter Analysis, a survey of more than 900 New Hampshire Democratic primary voters, show the contours of a resounding win for the incumbent. At the same time, the data suggest some areas of division within Biden’s coalition. Biden won every major demographic group by double digits. He was particularly strong among voters over age 65, those with college degrees and women. The race was somewhat closer among men. Biden won voters over age 45 by 52 points but was noticeably weaker among younger voters. The president had strong support from across the center and left of the political spectrum, getting a similar share of the vote from political moderates (62%), those who described themselves as "somewhat liberal" (64%) and "very liberal" voters (58%). Three quarters of primary voters approved of the job Biden is doing as president. The Fox News Polling Unit contributed to this report. Posted by Landon Mion Share

Fox News Voter Analysis: Trump tops Haley in New Hampshire Former President Trump won New Hampshire’s first-in-the-nation primary by 10 points over Nikki Haley. Trump is the first Republican candidate to win competitive elections in the Iowa caucuses and New Hampshire primary since 1976. Ron DeSantis ended his campaign two days before the primary, effectively making it a head-to-head race between Trump and Haley, who vowed to continue her campaign through the South Carolina primary on Feb. 24. The results of the Fox News Voter Analysis, a survey of nearly 2,000 New Hampshire Republican primary voters, show the contours of a race that was notably closer than last week’s Iowa caucuses, which Trump won by 30 points. In New Hampshire, unaffiliated voters – those not registered with a partisan affiliation – can participate in primary elections, and these voters were the main reason the race in the Granite State was tighter than in Iowa. Unaffiliated voters made up slightly less than half of the electorate (47%), and broke for Haley by 26 points. Just over half of unaffiliated voters (54%) considered themselves Republicans; the remainder generally identified as independents (26%) or Democrats (20%). Trump easily outpaced Haley among registered Republicans (+42 points). Haley won political moderates by 24 points, while Trump won self-described "somewhat conservatives" by the same margin (+24 points). He ran up the score among very conservative voters (+68 points). In the end, much of Haley’s support came from voters outside the GOP mainstream. Just over half of her supporters (52%) backed Joe Biden in the 2020 election, while 32% voted for Trump. The vast majority (90%) of Trump’s backers in the primary voted for him four years ago. Those who considered themselves part of the Make America Great Again movement went overwhelmingly for Trump (+77 points), while non-MAGA voters backed Haley by 52 points. Both candidates benefited from DeSantis dropping out, as he ran second in Iowa among both MAGA and non-MAGA voters. The Fox News Polling Unit contributed to this report. Posted by Landon Mion Share

Conservatives warn Haley after Trump wins New Hampshire primary: 'Drop out or help Democrats' Reactions quickly started pouring in on social media following former President Trump’s victory over former United Nations ambassador Nikki Haley in the New Hampshire primary, including from the Biden campaign and Trump supporters calling on Haley to drop out. "Congratulations to President Trump on his decisive victory tonight in America's first-in-the-nation primary!" GOP House Speaker Mike Johnson said in a statement. "Our House Republican leaders and a majority of Republican Senators support his reelection, and Republican voters in Iowa and New Hampshire have strongly backed him at the polls. It's now past time for the Republican Party to unite around President Trump so we can focus on ending the disastrous Biden presidency and growing our majority in Congress." "If Nikki Haley’s primary goal is to defeat Joe Biden in November, she will drop out tonight and endorse Trump," Federalist co-founder Sean Davis posted on X. "If she continues to stay in a race she cannot win just to attack Trump, then we’ll know she’s fully owned by the left-wing Democrats who are funding her campaign." "First time any candidate has won the first two primary states since 1976," Eric Trump posted on X. "Congrats to Donald Trump and the entire team on a decisive victory in New Hampshire!" Ohio GOP Sen. J.D. Vance posted on X. "At this point Haley can either drop out or help the Democrats." "I want to congratulate my good friend @realdonaldtrump on another resounding win in New Hampshire tonight," the account for former HUD Secretary Ben Carson and his wife Candy posted on X. "This primary is over, and I pray @NikkiHaley will drop out so we can focus our efforts on defeating Biden in November. We have a country to save and the stakes are too high." In a statement, the Biden presidential campaign said that the results "confirm Donald Trump has all but locked up the GOP nomination, and the election denying, anti-freedom MAGA movement has completed its takeover of the Republican Party." New Hampshire Gov. Chris Sununu, a staunch supporter of Haley's, posted on X that her 2nd place finish "turned the narrative of the national media on its head and proved this is indeed a two person race." Fox News' Andrew Mark Miller contributed to this report. Posted by Landon Mion Share

Record GOP turnout, calls for Haley to exit race round out top 5 moments from New Hampshire primary Former President Donald Trump and President Biden secured convincing victories in Tuesday's New Hampshire primaries, both wins evidence that a general election rematch is looking increasingly likely. Trump's main Republican opponent, former U.N. Ambassador Nikki Haley, had hoped to win enough support from moderate voters in the state for a come-from-behind win, as did Rep. Dean Phillips, D-Minn., who continues to make the case that Biden is too old and unpopular to successfully take on Trump. From record Republican turnout to intra-party criticism, here are the top five moments from the New Hampshire primaries: 1. Haley vows GOP race is "far from over" Despite her second loss in a row to Trump and polls suggesting the upcoming contests in Nevada and South Carolina, her home state, would produce similar results, Haley vowed to continue campaigning for the Republican nomination. 2. Trump declares Republican Party "very united" around his candidacy In an exclusive interview with Fox News Digital's Brooke Singman following his victory, Trump said he was "very honored" by the support he received from voters, and declared that the Republican Party was "very united" behind his candidacy. 3. Biden pulls off massive write-in victory after not appearing on ballot Biden won his party's primary despite failing to file as a candidate in the state last year, but did so with a massive write-in campaign that saw him tallying more than 60% of the overall vote at the time the race was called. 4. More big-name Republicans turn on Haley with calls to drop out of the race Following Trump's sizable win, more big-name Republicans began calling on Haley to drop out of the race, including Republican National Committee Chairwoman Ronna McDaniel. 5. Record number of voters turn out for the Republican primary The New Hampshire Republican primary saw record turnout on Tuesday despite some reports that low energy among voters would depress the vote. With approximately 92% of the vote counted, more than 293,000 ballots had been cast compared to just over 101,000 with approximately 88% of the vote counted in the Democrat primary. The previous record for a Republican primary in the state was set in 2016 during Trump's first run for the presidency, when around 284,000 cast ballots. Fox News' Brandon Gillespie contributed to this report. Posted by Landon Mion Share

Tim Scott sets crowd alive with one-liner after Trump says he ‘must really hate’ Haley Republican South Carolina Sen. Tim Scott set a New Hampshire crowd alive Tuesday with a one-liner about GOP presidential candidate Nikki Haley. The moment came as former President Donald Trump celebrated his victory in the Granite State's Republican primary, and said Scott "must really hate" Haley, who served as governor of South Carolina and appointed Scott to the Senate in 2012 to fill a vacancy. "We do go to South Carolina, where we have done really well, where I've done well. We have a great governor and lieutenant governor, great everything because almost every one of them have endorsed me — Two great senators, which is hard. I mean, did you ever think that she would actually appoint you, Tim?" Trump said as Scott stood behind him on the stage. Trump noted Scott's recent endorsement of him rather than Haley despite her appointing him to the Senate, and added, "You must really hate her." The crowd began laughing before Trump added, "No, it’s a shame. It's a shame." Scott then approached the microphone as Trump said, "Uh-oh!" "I just love you!" Scott said to more laughter from the crowd! Fox News' Brandon Gillespie contributed to this report. Posted by Landon Mion Share

Trump 'honored' by New Hampshire win, says Republican Party is 'very united' Former President Trump said he is "very honored" by his New Hampshire primary win Tuesday night, telling Fox News Digital that the Republican Party is "very united" behind his candidacy. Trump won the first-in-the-nation primary Tuesday night, defeating former South Carolina Gov. Nikki Haley. Trump also won the Iowa caucuses last week. During an exclusive interview with Fox News Digital shortly after the race was called, Trump said he was honored. "I’m very honored by the result," Trump said. Trump also said he is "looking forward to going against the worst president in the history of our country." New Hampshire – where independent voters who make up roughly 40% of the electorate can vote in either major party's contest and have long played an influential role in the state's storied presidential primary – was considered fertile ground for Haley. And Haley spent plenty of time and resources in the state, securing the influential endorsement of popular Republican Gov. Chris Sununu. But Trump dominated for a second week in a row, cruising to victory in both critical early voting states. When asked if he felt Haley would suspend her campaign, he said, "I don’t know. She should." "She should because, otherwise, we have to keep wasting money instead of spending on Biden," Trump said. "If she doesn’t drop out, we have to waste money instead of spending it on Biden, which is our focus." Trump, who was joined at a rally Monday night in New Hampshire by his former opponents who then endorsed him, including Sen. Tim Scott of South Carolina, entrepreneur Vivek Ramaswamy and Gov. Doug Burgum of North Dakota, said the party is united. Florida Gov. Ron DeSantis suspended his campaign on Sunday and endorsed Trump. "The party is very united except for her," Trump said. Fox News' Brooke Singman contributed to this report. Posted by Landon Mion Share

Ramaswamy: Haley should drop out for good of the country, as observers say she's still 'alive' Following Fox News' projection that former President Trump would win the New Hampshire Republican primary, former candidate Vivek Ramaswamy said the right move for runner-up Nikki Haley is to drop out and unite the party. Ramaswamy called Tuesday's results a decisive Trump victory and added that a large number of independents voted in the Republican primary due to the Granite State's open-primary system. He also called New Hampshire a microcosm of the national electorate: "It's like a terrain for the general election," he said, adding that some of Haley's large donors like LinkedIn co-founder Reid Hoffman are anti-Trump figures or typically Democratic donors. "So I think this is a prediction of what you're going to see in the general election. And the decisive margin we see tonight is, in some ways, I think, something that bodes well for Trump heading into the general election in November to reunite this country," he said. "And so, in my view, the general election really begins tonight. I think the Republican primary, for all intents and purposes, is over tonight. And I think the party and the country are better off if we see that for what it is." In her post-primary speech, Haley countered that the worst-kept secret in politics is that Democrats want to run against Trump in November, calling a Trump nomination precipitous of a "Biden win and Kamala Harris presidency." However, Fox News host Kayleigh McEnany added on "Jesse Watters Primetime" that Haley's plan to remain in the race through South Carolina and beyond is an obvious "play" for the vice presidency in a Trump administration. In the same vein, former Bush White House aide Karl Rove said Haley remaining the race may in one way benefit Trump, because battling the former governor allows him to "articulate a vision for the general election… if he takes on the task of describing a general election message, and positioning himself to beat Biden… then he's going to be better off." "Whoever is the Republican nominee is going to have a lot to do in unifying the party and lowering the temperature and the principal responsibility is the front-runner," Rove said. As Trump prepared to take the stage for a victory speech late Tuesday, Fox News political analyst Brit Hume quipped the former president was hoping for a resounding victory that would drive Haley from the race. As results trickled in showing about a 10-point spread at press time, Hume considered that the race was instead a "run for [Trump's] money that he didn't want." "He wanted what happened tonight to be a blowout win for him that would blow her out of the race," he said. "I don't think that's happened, so I don't know how gracious he's willing to be." Hume said Haley's candidacy appears to still be "alive and kicking" as South Carolina approaches next on the docket in late February. Fox News' Charles Creitz contributed to this report. Posted by Landon Mion Share

Fox News Voter Analysis: What NH Republicans want on foreign policy Let’s take a look at the U.S. role in world affairs. Half of Republican primary voters say the U.S. should play a less active role in solving the world’s problems. And 68% of these voters go for Trump, just a quarter go for Haley. Specifically, what about aid to Israel?64% of Republican primary voters in New Hampshire favor continuing aid to Israel. And of those, 54% of them voted for Trump, compared to 40% of them voting for Haley.But on Ukraine, New Hampshire Republicans are split. 49% of New Hampshire Republicans favor continuing aid to Ukraine. And among those, 63% went for Haley and 31% went for Trump. One more additional thing -- we asked voters who they think has the best policy ideas.75% of New Hampshire GOPers say it’s “very” important for the eventual nominee to have the best policy ideas. And these voters? Well, 61% of them go for Trump. Posted by Victoria Balara Share

Pro-Haley grassroots group admits she has 'steeper road ahead' facing Trump in South Carolina A pro-Haley grassroots group says the former U.N. ambassador is "closing the gap" but concedes that she has a "steeper road ahead" in the days ahead. "Tonight's results in New Hampshire show that Nikki Haley is closing the gap and that she is the clear alternative for voters who are ready to close the book on the toxic Biden-Trump political era. This is still an uphill battle. Now all eyes turn to South Carolina, where she has a steeper road ahead," Americans for Prosperity Action Senior Advisor Emily Seidel said. She warned that if Republicans nominate former President Donald Trump, "we risk a repeat of the past three elections and the very real threat of full progressive control increases dramatically." "This is why Joe Biden and the Democrats want him to be the nominee. The stakes for our country simply couldn’t be higher." Posted by Adam Shaw Share

Fox News Voter Analysis: Where Trump and Haley fared best in New Hampshire primary Former president Trump had another good night in New Hampshire.The groups who put him over the top by 30 points in Iowa showed up again in the Granite State. In New Hampshire, 81% of self-identified very conservatives went for Trump -- compared to 58% in Iowa. And 64% of those with no college degree backed the former president, while 57% of rural voters also voted for him. Nikki Haley was counting on a different mix of voters in New Hampshire to boost her chances. And she did okay among moderates, college educated voters, and suburban voters -- but it just wasn’t enough. Meanwhile, Trump is still facing multiple investigations and indictments. What do New Hampshire Republicans think about it? 46% think Trump did nothing wrong when it comes to January 6th, 43% say the same about his alleged interference in the 2020 vote count, and it is 37% when it comes to classified documents at Mar-a-Lago. We also asked voters “is Trump too extreme to win in November?” and New Hampshire Republicans are split on this. Among the half who say he is too extreme, 71% supported Haley. And this supports her contention that she has a better chance in the general election than Trump. Posted by Victoria Balara Share

Biden says 'stakes could not be higher' after NH victory President Biden on Tuesday said the "stakes could not be higher" after he and former President Trump secured victories in their respective presidential primaries in New Hampshire. "It is now clear that Donald Trump will be the Republican nominee. And my message to the country is the stakes could not be higher. Our Democracy. Our personal freedoms — from the right to choose to the right to vote. Our economy — which has seen the strongest recovery in the world since COVID. All are at stake," Biden said in a statement. "I want to thank all those who wrote my name in this evening in New Hampshire. It was a historic demonstration of commitment to our democratic process. And I want to say to all those Independents and Republicans who share our commitment to core values of our nation — our Democracy, our personal freedoms, an economy that gives everyone a fair shot — to join us as Americans." "Let’s remember. We are the United States of America. And there is nothing — nothing — we can’t do if we do it together," he said. Posted by Adam Shaw Share

Nikki Haley set to outperform polls in New Hampshire primary Haley is performing well in the areas she needed to carry. The best example is Bedford, a wealthy suburb of Manchester. This traditionally Republican area flipped blue for the first time in decades in the 2020 general election. With 95% of the vote in there, Haley is running about 10 points ahead of Trump. That’s why she looks set to outperform some of the recent polls. As we know, that won’t translate into an overall win. There’s a lot of Trump vote out there, all across the state. And it showed up in force for the former president tonight. Posted by Rémy Numa Share

Haley campaign takes aim at "angry" Trump speech Former U.N. Ambassador Nikki Haley's campaign is accusing former President Donald Trump of being "angry" after a speech in which he took aim at Haley. “Two states have now voted in the presidential race, and Donald Trump barely received half of the vote – not exactly a ringing endorsement for a former president demanding a coronation,” said Haley communications director Nachama Soloveichik. “His angry rant was filled with grievances and offered the American people nothing about his vision for our country’s future. This is why so many voters want to move on from Trump’s chaos and are rallying to Nikki Haley’s new generation of conservative leadership.” Posted by Adam Shaw Share

Trump wins again in New Hampshire, Haley vows to keep going Former President Donald Trump did it again. Eight days after he crushed the competition in Iowa's low-turnout Republican presidential caucuses, Trump quickly defeated Nikki Haley - his final remaining major rival for the GOP nomination - in Tuesday's New Hampshire primary. Fox News projected Trump would win the primary just a few minutes after the final polls closed in New Hampshire."I’m very honored by the result," Trump told Fox News Digital's Brooke Singman in a statement. Haley said in a speech to supporters in Concord, New Hampshire after the race was called that "I want to congratulate Donald Trump on his victory tonight. He earned it and I want to acknowledge that."When asked if he felt Haley would suspend her campaign, Trump told Fox News Digital that he didn't know but "she should." But as the votes continued to be tabulated, the former president's margin over Haley remained in the single digits. And Haley emphasized her campaign would continue. "Now you’ve all heard the chatter among the political class. They’re falling all over themselves saying this race is over. Well, I have news for all of them: New Hampshire is first in the nation. It is not last in the nation. This race is far from over." Posted by Paul Steinhauser Share

Florida Senator Marco Rubio jabs at Haley, declares Trump 'will be the GOP nominee' Florida Senator Marco Rubio, a Republican, declared former President Trump will carry the party's torch in the 2024 presidential election. Rubio, who ran for president in 2016, made his declaration on Tuesday after Trump's win in New Hampshire over former South Carolina Governor Nikki Haley. "Trump will be the GOP nominee," Rubio tweeted on Tuesday. "What we don’t know yet is how much donor money is going to be wasted over the next month," he continued in a jab at Haley continuing her campaign. Rubio's tweet comes as a chorus of Republican senators throw their hats behind Trump for president in 2024. Nebraska GOP Senator Deb Fischer gave her endorsement of Trump for president after his victory on Tuesday. She joined Texas Senator John Cornyn, a fellow Republican, in backing the former president's bid to take on President Biden for the Oval Office. Posted by Houston Keene Share

Ramaswamy calls on Haley to end campaign following 'decisive' Trump victory in New Hampshire Former Republican presidential candidate Vivek Ramaswamy called on Nikki Haley to end her bid for the presidency Tuesday following Donald Trump's "decisive" victory in the New Hampshire GOP primary. "I think this is a decisive win for Donald Trump. That’s what we are seeing tonight," Ramaswamy told Fox News. "It might be the general election really begins tonight. I think the Republican primary, for all intents and purposes, is over tonight, and the party and the country are better off if we see that for what it is." When asked if he was calling for Haley to suspend her campaign, Ramaswamy said it would "be the right thing for the country." He added that Haley continuing her campaign would "send the signal" that she is counting on Trump being eliminated from the contest through outside means, meaning his legal troubles. "I think that is downright wrong. I think it’s wrong for the Republican Party and wrong for this country," Ramaswamy said. "There is no viable path for her to defeat him through the front door." "It’s time for Nikki Haley to do the right thing," he added. Posted by Brandon Gillespie Share

Phillips to remain in Dem presidential primary race, says voters deserve 'options' Rep. Dean Phillips, D-Minn., says he will remain in the Democratic presidential primary race, despite losing to President Biden in the New Hampshire primary. "Congratulations to President Biden, who absolutely won tonight, but by no means in a way that a strong incumbent president should," he said. Biden is projected to have won the primary, despite not being on the ballot, after a write-in campaign from his supporters. Phillips said voters deserved "options" and also praised GOP candidate Nikki Haley for remaining in the race despite her defeat in the Republican primary to former President Donald Trump. "This country deserves options, this country should not have coronations. And I know I know the exhausted majority of this country, center right and center, left Americans. I know they'd much rather see a Nikki Haley-Dean Phillips matchup this November, and we're going to try to get that done," he said. Posted by Adam Shaw Share

Nebraska Senator Deb Fischer endorses Trump for president after New Hampshire win Nebraska Senator Deb Fischer, a Republican, endorsed former President Trump for president after his New Hampshire GOP primary win over former South Carolina Governor Nikki Haley. Fischer posted a statement on Tuesday night endorsing Trump after the former president took the GOP primary election in the Granite State. "It's time for Republicans to unite around President Donald Trump and make Joe Biden a one-term president," Fischer said. "These last three years have yielded a crippling border crisis, an inflationary economy that prices the American Dream out of reach for families, and a world in constant turmoil with our enemies on the march," she continued. "I endorse Donald Trump for President so we can secure our border, get our economy moving again, and keep America safe," she added. Fischer is the latest GOP senator to endorse Trump after his win in New Hampshire, joining Texas GOP Senator John Cornyn. Posted by Houston Keene Share

Fox News Voter Analysis: What sort of New Hampshire Republicans support Trump? The New Hampshire primary has wrapped and former president Donald Trump is the winner.With our Fox News Voter Analysis election survey, we’ve been talking with more than 1,800 N.H. Republican primary voters. Let’s start by looking at some of the groups where Trump did the best.Half of N.H. Republican primary voters describe themselves as MAGA supporters, and 87% of them voted for Trump. He also did well with conservative voters, folks without a college degree, and rural voters. This is similar to what we saw in Iowa last week.When did primary voters decide who they were voting for? Six-in-10 decided more than a month ago. And 69% of this group goes for Trump, only a quarter for Haley.What do Republican primary voters think about how the country is run? About three-in-10 voters say they want complete and total upheaval -- and 82% of them go for Trump. This is even more than in Iowa, where 70% of these caucus goers went for Trump.One more thing, about winning in November: 74% say it’s very important for the Republican nominee to be able to win in November. Over six-in-10 of these voters go for Trump. Posted by Victoria Balara Share

Haley declares GOP race 'far from over' after dropping New Hampshire primary to Trump Former U.N. Ambassador Nikki Haley declared the race for the Republican nomination "far from over," despite her second straight loss to former President Donald Trump, this time in the New Hampshire GOP primary. "New Hampshire is first in the nation. It is not the last in the nation nation. This race is far from over. There are dozens of states left to go," Haley told a crowd of supporters gathered at her election watch party on Tuesday. "At one point, in this campaign, there were 14 of us running, and we were at 2% in the polls. Well, I’m a fighter, and I’m scrappy. And now we are the last ones standing next to Donald Trump," she added. The race now heads to Nevada and then to Haley's home state of South Carolina, where Trump currently holds a commanding lead. Posted by Brandon Gillespie Share

Biden-Harris campaign declares Trump the GOP nominee after New Hampshire primary win President Biden and Vice President Kamala Harris' re-election campaign responded to former President Donald Trump's win in the New Hampshire Republican primary by declaring him to be the GOP nominee for president. Trump easily defeated former U.N. Ambassador Nikki Haley despite her surge in the Granite State in recent weeks. "Tonight’s results confirm Donald Trump has all but locked up the GOP nomination, and the election denying, anti-freedom MAGA movement has completed its takeover of the Republican Party," campaign manager Julie Chavez Rodriguez said in a statement. "Trump is offering Americans the same extreme agenda that has cost Republicans election after election: promising to undermine American democracy, reward the wealthy on the backs of the middle class, and ban abortion nationwide," she said. "Joe Biden sees things differently. He’s fighting to grow our economy for the middle-class, strengthen our democracy, and protect the rights of every single American. While we work toward November 2024, one thing is increasingly clear today: Donald Trump is headed straight into a general election matchup where he’ll face the only person to have ever beaten him at the ballot box: Joe Biden," she added. Posted by Brandon Gillespie Share

Stefanik congratulates Trump on 'monumental' NH victory, calls on Haley to drop out House Republican Conference Chair Elise Stefanik is congratulating former President Donald Trump on his "monumental" victory in New Hampshire, and called on former U.N. Ambassador Nikki Haley to drop out. “Congratulations to President Donald Trump on his monumental victory in the New Hampshire Primary and making history as the first GOP challenger candidate to win both Iowa and New Hampshire!" she said in a statement. "Thank you to the Granite Staters for your incredible support for President Trump. Having spent the past weekend in the Live Free or Die State, I saw firsthand the energy and momentum behind President Trump’s campaign to Save America. President Trump has the most enthusiastic supporters and volunteers of any campaign in U.S. history." "This evening, Granite Staters also overwhelmingly rejected Nikki Haley and her Extreme Democrat and Never Trump donors. For the sake of the Republic, it is well past time for her to suspend her failing campaign and unite behind President Trump to take on the most corrupt president in history Joe Biden," she said. "I know President Trump will defeat Joe Biden; the voters know it, Joe Biden knows it, and Nikki Haley knows it. Any effort to desperately divide Republicans going forward will be remembered and seen as a direct assist to Joe Biden’s failing campaign." "It must end now." Fox News' Brooke Singman contributed to this report. Posted by Adam Shaw Share

Outcomes from past New Hampshire primary elections Over the last 50 years, in primaries where there was no incumbent president, New Hampshire has had a stellar record of choosing the Republican nominee, 71.4%, but a below-average record of choosing the next president, 42.8%. In 1976, President Gerald Ford won a highly contested primary against Reagan on his way to capturing the nomination. He lost the general election to Carter. In 2016, New Hampshire voted for then-outsider Donald Trump, going to establishmentarian Mitt Romney in 2012, and then the comeback campaign of John McCain in 2008. McCain also won the primaries in 2000. Massachusetts Gov. Michael Dukakis won the 1988 primary in New Hampshire, but he lost the general election to Vice President George H.W. Bush. Vice President Al Gore won the 2000 primary, but lost the general election to then-Texas Gov. George W. Bush. In 2004, then-Sen. John Kerry of Massachusetts won the primary election, but lost to Bush in the general election. Democrats had a much worse prediction record in the state, only choosing the nominee in an open primary 37.5% of the time and never successfully choosing the president. In 2020 and 2016 they voted for Bernie Sanders, Hillary Clinton in 2008, and John Kerry in 2004. Fox News' Gabriele Regalbuto contributed to this report. Posted by Matteo Cina Share

How has New Hampshire voted in the past? A bit of an oddity in the Northeast, New Hampshire has a strong trend of fiscal conservatism and social liberalism that tends to vote Republican in local elections but Democrat in national elections. New Hampshire has gone blue in every presidential election after 2000, when former President George W. Bush won the state by 2 points, and it has been alternating between Republican and Democrat governors somewhat evenly over the past three decades. Both U.S. senators and both U.S. representatives are Democrats, but both chambers of the state legislature are controlled by Republicans. Living up to their independent streak, looking at Republican presidential primaries don’t paint a much clearer picture on who the state traditionally supports. In 2016, they supported then- outsider Donald Trump with 36% of the vote, in 2012 they supported establishment favorite Mitt Romney with 52% of the vote, but in 2008 they backed John McCain with 46% of the vote. The year 2000 was Bush with 62%, 1996 was Bob Dole with 58%, and 1984 was George H.W. Bush with 68%. The only unifying thread, with Bob Dole being the exception, is that New Hampshire appears to choose the candidate who goes on to win the primary. Posted by Matteo Cina Share

Breaking News Donald Trump wins New Hampshire GOP primary: Fox News Decision desk The Fox News Decision Desk can now project that former President Donald Trump will win the New Hampshire Republican primary. This is an important win for Trump, given the role that undeclared voters and moderate New England Republicans play in the state. He defeats his only notable rival, former Governor Nikki Haley. Haley appears to be running a somewhat closer race than some recent surveys showed. Both candidates will receive a share of the 22 delegates at stake tonight. Posted by Decision Desk Share

Breaking News Donald Trump holds solid lead in New Hampshire Republican primary: Fox News Decision Desk The last polls have closed in New Hampshire. The Fox News Decision Desk believes former President Donald Trump has a solid lead in the Republican primary. Former Governor Nikki Haley appears to be running a somewhat closer race than some recent surveys showed. Posted by Decision Desk Share

Breaking News Biden wins New Hampshire Democratic primary, Fox News Decision Desk projects Last polls have closed in New Hampshire. The Fox News Decision Desk can project that President Joe Biden will win the Democratic primary. Biden’s voters had to write his name in today because of a dispute between the DNC and New Hampshire over which states should vote first. He defeats rivals including Rep. Dean Phillips, the Minnesota congressman, who is likely to finish in double digits. He entered the race calling for a “new generation of leaders.” This is a symbolic victory. Because of the same dispute, there are no delegates on the line tonight. Posted by Decision Desk Share

Fox News Voter Analysis: Will New Hampshire Republicans vote for Trump if he's the nominee? Here are some top findings from Republican primary voters in New Hampshire, starting with how the landscape’s different today, compared to Iowa. First up, evangelicals - Trump won Iowa in large part thanks to their support. But in New Hampshire, only one in five are evangelical Christians. In Iowa, evangelicals were 46% - that’s a 25-point difference. Another difference between Iowa and New Hampshire is the share who identify as MAGA.In New Hampshire, about half consider themselves MAGA supporters, while in Iowa that was 62%. And, here’s a gut check question. Who do these folks think will win the GOP nomination?Fewer than 2 in 10 GOP primary voters expect it will be Nikki Haley. But far more, nearly 8 in 10, say Donald Trump wins. That includes some Haley supporters! But, how satisfied would they be if it’s Trump? Posted by Victoria Balara Share

Is writing in Biden a waste of a vote? New Hampshire Democrats are facing an unusual dilemma in tonight’s presidential primary, where President Biden will not be on the ballot -- and it will be up to Biden supporters to write in his name. The Democratic National Committee had hoped to hold the party’s first primary in South Carolina on Feb. 3, but New Hampshire Secretary of State David Scanlan, a Republican, had announced that the primary would go ahead on Jan 23 It’s a state that Rep. Dean Phillips, D-Minn., is focusing much of his attention. His and others’ names will be on the ballot, but not Biden. As a result, top Democrats have launched a write-in campaign. Phillips stands at 10% in a University of New Hampshire/CNN poll conducted Jan. 16-19, a point ahead of bestselling author and spiritual adviser Marianne Williamson, who is making her second straight White House run. Sixty-three percent of those questioned in the survey said they'd write in Biden's name. While Biden is the commanding front-runner for the nomination, writing in his name is unlikely to be a wasted vote, as anything but a Biden win in the state would create a difficult narrative for his campaign and raise questions about the strength of support for his candidacy -- and would give a massive boost to his critics both inside the party and from outside. Fox News' Paul Steinhauser and Landon Mion contributed to this report. Posted by Adam Shaw Share

Fox News Voter Analysis: Large portion of NH Democrats say Biden is too old for second term What about President Biden’s age? In our survey of Democratic primary voters, over half believe his age isn’t a problem. But more than 4 in 10 Granite State Dems say he’s too old to serve another term. And get this, that includes even some who are supporting Biden today. Posted by Victoria Balara Share

Fox News Voter Analysis: New Hampshire Republicans on whether Biden won 2020 'legitimately' “Mental capability” is the number one quality New Hampshire Republicans are looking for in a presidential candidate. That is far ahead of other traits, such as being a strong leader of having the best policies – it’s even more important than their candidate winning in November. Here’s one possible reason the ability to defeat Joe Biden feels less important to Republicans: a majority doesn’t accept Trump’s 2020 defeat. This includes almost all Trump supporters. Posted by Victoria Balara Share

New Hampshire primary results coming soon We will start seeing some vote results soon, but don't draw any conclusions. Twenty towns are still voting until 8 p.m. That includes Nashua, which had the second highest number of raw votes in the 2016 Republican primary. Posted by Rémy Numa Share

Fox News Voter Analysis: New Hampshire Republicans overwhelmingly see bias in Trump charges When it comes to the charges against former President Trump, just one-third of Republicans in New Hampshire say that they’re legitimate attempts to investigate important issues, while two-thirds say that they’re political attempts to undermine the former president. Posted by Victoria Balara Share

Fox News Voter Analysis: What New Hampshire voters want in a GOP nominee Let’s dig into some top findings from New Hampshire. First, what qualities are Republicans looking for in their nominee? Almost all Granite State GOP voters say their nominee’s mental capability is very important. That’s far more than say the same about other traits, like being a strong leader and having the best policies -- it’s even more than feel that way about their candidate winning in November. Posted by Victoria Balara Share

Breaking News Polls have begun closing in New Hampshire It's 7:00 p.m. ET and the first polls have begun closing in New Hampshire's first in the nation primary. Some sites will remain open, but every polling location in New Hampshire will be closed by 8 p.m. ET Posted by Brandon Gillespie Share

Fox News Voter Analysis: New Hampshire Republicans strongly support border wall When it comes to the U.S. Mexico wall, Republicans in New Hampshire support it – just as they did in Iowa. Posted by Victoria Balara Share

Fox News Voter Analysis: How New Hampshire Republicans view immigration Immigration is a top issue for Republicans across the country – and that continues to be true in New Hampshire. So, do New Hampshire Republicans say immigrants do more to help or hurt the country? Well, close to 7 in 10 say they do more to hurt. That was similar to what we saw in Iowa, where three quarters of Republicans said immigrants do more to hurt the county than to help the country. Posted by Victoria Balara Share

Nikki Haley will only debate Joe Biden or Donald Trump during rest of 2024 campaign Former South Carolina Governor Nikki Haley has made it a point that she will only agree to more debates as long as former president Donald Trump or President Joe Biden are also on the debate stage. Haley declined a debate moderated by ABC News unless Trump were to attend. The debate invitation was extended to Haley, Trump and Florida Governor Ron DeSantis. Haley released a statement on her decision as to why she would not participate. “We’ve had five great debates in this campaign. Unfortunately, Donald Trump has ducked all of them. He has nowhere left to hide. The next debate I do will either be with Donald Trump or with Joe Biden. I look forward to it.” The former president has denied participating in debates, given his lead in polls. Florida Governor DeSantis went after Haley on X for her decision on not participating in debates, last week. “Nikki Haley is afraid to debate because she doesn’t want to answer the tough questions such as how she got rich off Boeing after giving them millions in taxpayer handouts as governor of South Carolina,” DeSantis claimed. “The reality is that she is not running for the nomination, she’s running to be Trump’s VP,” he added. The Florida governor went on to say that unlike Haley and Trump he wouldn’t “snub New Hampshire voters,” and that he anticipated the debate with “two empty podiums in the Granite State.” There have been 5 Republican presidential primary debates so far. Fox News’ Anders Hagstrom and Greg Wehner contributed to this report. Posted by Emily Robertson Share

What tonight's primaries mean for the delegate race Tonight, there are 22 delegates on the line for Republicans in New Hampshire. Trump and Haley will take delegates home in proportion with their vote. In other words, a candidate who wins about half the vote can expect about 11 delegates. There’s a small difference between New Hampshire’s rules and what we saw in Iowa – candidates must get at least 10% of the vote to win any delegates at all. But with Trump and Haley the only notable candidates left in this race, that’s not likely to matter. Democrats are voting in an “advisory primary,” the result of a spat between the DNC and the Granite State. That means no delegates are at stake. The results might have symbolic meaning. Biden’s chief rival Rep. Dean Phillips has invested heavily here. If he outperforms expectations, we could see a lot more of him this primary season. Posted by Rémy Numa Share

Fox News Voter Analysis: New Hampshire Republicans reveal their personal financial situation On a personal level, what do Republicans think about their own financial situation? As we saw in the Iowa caucus last week, New Hampshire Republican primary voters say they’re in bad shape financially. Just about 1 in 10 say they’re getting ahead, while more than two times that say they are falling behind. That’s similar to the nearly six-in-ten Iowa Republican caucus goers who said they were just ‘holding steady’ and the third who said they were ‘falling behind’. Posted by Victoria Balara Share

Fox News Voter Analysis: Immigration tops list of most important issues for NH Republicans Immigration tops the list of issues that are most important to Republican voters – both in New Hampshire and in Iowa. In Iowa, four-in-ten Republicans said immigration was the most important issue, followed by a third saying the economy and jobs. No other issue comes close. In New Hampshire the story is the same, with 4 in 10 Republican primary voters saying immigration is their top issue. Posted by Victoria Balara Share

Who is Biden challenger Marianne Williamson? Democrat presidential candidate Marianne Williamson is a spiritual adviser and bestselling self-help author who is running for her party's presidential nomination for the second time. She first ran unsuccessfully in 2020, but officially declared her candidacy again last March. During the 2020 cycle, Williamson was an unconventional candidate who preached the politics of love. She emphasized "six pillars for a season of moral repair," including economic justice. She proposed creating a Department of Children and Youths and a Department of Peace, and she pushed for reparations for the descendants of African-American slaves. Among her unorthodox acts was holding a meditation session while campaigning in New Hampshire. Fox News' Paul Steinhauser, Kyle Morris and Thomas Phippen contributed to this report. Posted by Brandon Gillespie Share

What does it mean if Donald Trump wins New Hampshire tonight? Former President Donald Trump's likely win in the New Hampshire Republican primary tonight could mean a number of things, and will probably depend on the margin of his victory. A commanding win would only solidify his frontrunner status, and former U.N. Ambassador Nikki Haley would likely face increased calls to end her bid for the GOP nomination. If Haley surges and limits Trump to a marginal victory, the race could continue through the Nevada caucuses on Feb. 8 and the South Carolina primary on Feb. 24. If Haley stays competitive and remains in the race, the contest between the two would then head to Michigan and other states. Posted by Brandon Gillespie Share

New Hampshire voter turnout is 'very strong,' officials say New Hampshire’s Secretary of State office tells Fox News they can “confidently say voter turnout is very strong” and is so far on track to meet the predicted record voter turnout. They added “It’ll be interesting to see how close that prediction got.” They estimated a record high 322,000 turnout for a Republican primary. Results are expected to start trickling in during the 7 p.m. hour. During the 2020 election, final results for both the Republican and Democratic primaries were announced shortly after midnight. The primaries are semi-closed, meaning that unaffiliated voters may vote in either the Republican or Democrat primary, but Democrats may not vote in the Republican primary and vice versa. Fox News' Paul Steinhauser and Bryan Llenas contributed to this report. Posted by Adam Shaw Share

Nikki Haley PAC releases talking points ahead of New Hampshire showdown FIRST ON FOX: A political action committee (PAC) supporting GOP presidential candidate Nikki Haley released talking points ahead of her showdown with former President Trump in New Hampshire. Tuesday marks the critical New Hampshire primary election that will prove to either solidify Trump as the 2024 Republican presidential nominee or show Haley has a chance. Stand for America Fund, Inc., a PAC founded by Haley supporting her presidential aspirations, published talking points ahead of Tuesday's primary claiming the scalp of Florida Governor Ron DeSantis' recently-suspended campaign. "We've already been successful this week, we knocked Ron DeSantis out of the race this weekend," the first talker obtained by Fox News Digital reads. "We were at 20 points in Iowa, we'll gain on that in New Hampshire and are in striking distance to Donald Trump," the talking points continue. "A month ago people would have laughed if we told you Nikki Haley got 20% of the vote, tying Ron DeSantis in Iowa and knocking him out of the race and would be going head to head with Donald Trump into New Hampshire." The PAC's talkers said its "ready for South Carolina, an open primary and Nikki's home state," and that they will then "turn to Michigan, an open primary state and then 11 of 14 Super Tuesday states have open or semi-open primaries." "Nikki has defied expectations every step of the way, voters deserve a choice and she knows she's the best person to take on Joe Biden," the final point reads. Posted by Houston Keene Share

Who is longshot 2024 presidential candidate Ryan Binkley? There are many big names among the GOP candidates in the 2024 presidential election, but candidate Ryan Binkley is not one of them. Binkley, a businessman, lead pastor and a longshot contender for the Republican 2024 presidential nomination, announced his run for the presidency on April 23, 2023. He was born in Columbus, Georgia and grew up in Texas. He graduated with a Bachelor's degree in Business Administration and entrepreneurship from the University of Texas at Austin and a Master's degree in Business Administration from the Cox School of Business at Southern Methodist University, according to his campaign website. Binkley worked for Proctor & Gamble and the Boston Scientific Corporation before making a career change. He launched the Generational Group in 2005 and became CEO and president in 2023. Binkley is the co-founder, along with his wife Ellie, of Create Church also located in Richardson, Texas in 2014 and has served as lead pastor since 2023. The couple have five children and their youngest was adopted from South Korea, where his wife was born before she moved to the United States with her parents, according to his campaign website. Binkley is urging "America's leaders to return to the core values of trusting in God and each other again, caring for the hurting, leading with integrity, and bringing hope and healing to your nation," the site also states. Despite campaigning and holding events in Iowa ahead of tonight's caucus, the businessman and pastor has failed to gain support in any polls, according to Des Moines Register. Posted by Emily Robertson Share

New Hampshire voters: What you need to know to vote before polls close today New Hampshire hosts the nation’s first presidential primary, with polls opening in the small town of Dixville Notch at midnight and other towns following suit in the morning. Most polling places will close at 7 p.m. ET, with all polls closing by 8 p.m. Results are expected to start trickling in during the 7 p.m. hour. During the 2020 election, final results for both the Republican and Democratic primaries were announced shortly after midnight. Concord and Manchester, the state’s capital and largest city, respectively, typically tally votes faster than the state’s more rural areas, according to the Associated Press. The results for Dixville Notch, where only six residents voted, were tallied shortly after midnight, with all votes going for Haley. The New Hampshire primary is “open,” meaning politically undeclared voters can cast ballots in a party primary. Posted by Emma Colton Share

What happened to Asa Hutchinson? Former Arkansas Gov. Asa Hutchinson ended his longshot presidential bid just a day after his poor performance in the Iowa caucuses, where he earned less than 200 votes. Hutchinson finished just before ex-New Jersey Governor Chris Christie, who dropped out before the Iowa caucuses, and trailed Ryan Binkley, a businessman with no national political platform. “Today, I am suspending my campaign for President and driving back to Arkansas,” Hutchinson said in a statement last week. “My message of being a principled Republican with experience and telling the truth about the current front runner did not sell in Iowa.” Hutchinson and Christie were the only two GOP 2024 hopefuls who attacked ex-President Donald Trump early, directly and often toward the beginning of the race. But Hutchinson never seemed to generate enough voter interest for any serious momentum, and he failed to crack 1% support in most national polls. He has not issued an endorsement for either of the candidates left. Posted by Liz Elkind Share

The highs and lows of Trump and Haley's relationship The race between former President Donald Trump and his ex-Ambassador to the United Nations Nikki Haley has taken a particularly bitter turn in the last days before the New Hampshire primary, the latest update in a yearslong hot-and-cold relationship. She was quick to stand against his candidacy in 2016, endorsing Florida Sen. Marco Rubio in the primary. But by the time Haley left his administration in 2018, Trump heaped praise on her and lauded Haley as his “friend.” “She's done a fantastic job and we've done a fantastic job together. We've solved a lot of problems and we’re in the process of solving a lot of problems,” he said. Haley in turn praised Trump’s foreign policy, saying, “Countries may not like what we do, but they respect what we do.” She condemned him in the week after the Jan. 6, 2021 Capitol attack, however, telling Politico at the time, “I think he’s lost any sort of political viability he was going to have.” Haley backpedaled somewhat in comments to the Wall Street Journal in October of that year, saying, “We need him in the Republican Party. I don’t want us to go back to the days before Trump.” Even her decision to ultimately challenge him for president was preceded by Haley vowing in 2021 to never get into the Republican presidential primary if Trump was also running – before ultimately throwing her hat in the ring. Posted by Liz Elkind Share

Fox News Voter Analysis to reveal what New Hampshire Republicans really think It’s primary night in New Hampshire and our Fox News Voter Analysis has been asking likely Republican primary voters in the state -- about 1,800 of them -- who they are supporting and why. Conducted along with our partners the Associated Press and NORC at the University of Chicago, Fox News will be using this innovative election survey approach throughout the 2024 primary season. In New Hampshire, we’ll be looking at questions such as are GOP primary voters interested in a candidate who has good policy ideas? One who is a strong leader? What about defeating Joe Biden in the fall -- is that what New Hampshire Republicans care about most of all? We’ll also be diving into the most important issues facing the country. Is it the economy? Abortion? Immigration? And will Republicans come together and support their nominee in November, or are we looking at a chance that the party will split?We’ll also be asking likely Democratic voters -- about 900 of them -- about their views on the Democratic race and on President Biden. All that and more is on deck. The survey questionnaire and results will be posted on foxnews.com after 8 p.m. ET. And keep checking back here for more news and analysis of the results. Posted by Victoria Balara Share

Who is Chris Sununu? Republican Gov. Chris Sununu took office as the 82nd governor of New Hampshire in 2017 and is currently serving his fourth and final term. He previously served three terms on the New Hampshire Executive Council from 2011 to 2017 before becoming governor. His father, Republican John H. Sununu, is the former 75th New Hampshire governor and former White House chief of staff under President George H. W. Bush, and his brother is former Representative and former Senator of New Hampshire, Republican John E. Sununu. Sununu was born and raised in Salem, New Hampshire, and graduated from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology with a Bachelor of Science in Civil/Environmental Engineering. He helped clean up hazardous waste sites for 10 years, according to his campaign website. He and his wife, Valerie, have three children. The New Hampshire governor has been named the nation’s most fiscally responsible governor by Cato Institute, according to his site. Posted by Emily Robertson Share

How does the GOP choose a presidential candidate? Unlike Iowa, where the caucuses took place last week, New Hampshire operates on a traditional primary system. This means, like most of the nation, New Hampshirites will show up at polling locations throughout the day and privately vote for who they wish. The primaries are semi-closed, meaning that unaffiliated voters may vote in either the Republican or Democrat primary, but Democrats may not vote in the Republican primary and vice versa. Polling times vary by municipality but must open by 11:00 a.m. and cannot close before 7:00 p.m. Results are expected to be in around 10:00 p.m. EST. When all the primaries are concluded a convention will be held where delegates nominate the winner. Traditionally this is a routine formality but “brokered conventions”, one where no candidate receives a majority, are possible. During a brokered convention, delegates politik and vote for their preferred candidate largely irrespective of state primary results. The last brokered GOP convention was in 1976 where neither Reagan nor Ford received a majority. While unprecedented, if a leading candidate was died or was otherwise indisposed, such as being imprisoned, it could possibly trigger a brokered convention regardless of whether they met the delegate threshold. Posted by Matteo Cina Share

What went wrong with DeSantis' run for the Republican presidential nomination? On January 21, 2024 Ron DeSantis ended his presidential campaign after 243 days and only one election. Once upon a time, DeSantis was the clear front runner but after a summer, fall, and winter of brutal attacks from President Trump his campaign began to flounder. Longtime Republican consultant Alex Castellanos, a veteran of half-a-dozen presidential campaigns, noted that DeSantis "ran a mechanical campaign and failed on two mechanical fronts." "He wasted bazillions on door knocking when you don’t build a brand going door to door. And two – he’s a mechanical candidate who you don’t want at your door. You need to be a people person to run for public office," he argued. Dan Eberhart, a top DeSantis donor, bundler and surrogate, told Fox News Digital that "Ron DeSantis ran into a bump and the bump was named Trump." Upon dropping out, DeSantis endorsed President Trump in a video posted to X. Posted by Matteo Cina Share

New Hampshire governor defends Nikki Haley: ‘Trump is more of the establishment guy now’ Posted by Michael Lee Share

Rep Donalds makes final pitch for Trump to undecided New Hampshire voters Florida GOP Rep. Byron Donalds had a message for New Hampshire voters who might be on the fence between former President Donald Trump and former South Carolina Gov. Nikki Haley. "I mean, look, my closing message is this, our party, we're blessed, we have a lot of talent in our party, but it is pretty clear at this point that the majority of our party wants President Trump in office again," Donalds told Fox News Digital from a Trump rally in the state Monday. "The vast majority. It's pretty clear at this point." Donalds said that it is time for members of the GOP to unite around Trump, arguing that there are "radicals in the White House who are destroying this country" and that Republicans must be "one party so we can fix this country and get it back for not only ourselves, but for our kids and our future." Posted by Michael Lee Share

'Getting less for your buck': Voters in New Hampshire deliver thoughts on economy New Hampshire voters will go to the poll with the economy on their mind, with many of the state's residents expressing concerns about issues such as gas prices and the cost of living. "You're getting less for your buck now," Irene, who was visiting Manchester, told Fox News. "It's horrible." Irene also lamented the price of groceries and other essential items, arguing it has become hard to make a living that pays for everyday expenses. "Unless you had saved money and set it aside … you would be very hard-pressed to make a living from month to month just for groceries and daily essentials," she said. Meanwhile, others argued that things are starting to go in a better direction. "Gas is down," Clayton, a voter from Manchester, told Fox News Digital. Jessie, another voter from Manchester, told Fox News Digital that while things have improved slightly, concerns still linger. "Maybe it's slowed down a little bit in the last year or so, but … it's still a lot worse than it was four years ago," Jessie said. Posted by Michael Lee Share

Conservative lawmakers and groups who have endorsed Nikki Haley Haley has secured a number of endorsements from conservative lawmakers and groups since she kicked off her campaign for the 2024 presidential election cycle. Americans for Prosperity Action, the political wing of the influential and deep-pocketed fiscally conservative network founded by the billionaire Koch Brothers, endorsed Nikki Haley for the 2024 Republican presidential nomination in late November. On Friday, Vermont Gov. Phil Scott also endorsed Haley ahead of New Hampshire’s GOP primary election tonight. "America has a decision to make, and our friends and neighbors in New Hampshire have an opportunity to showcase their deep-rooted independent streak. After years of controversy, violent rhetoric and growing polarization, the very last thing we need is four more years of Donald Trump," Scott said in a statement released by his campaign. Top Trump ally and House Freedom Caucus member Rep. Ralph Norman endorsed Haley in February last year, stating to Fox News Digital at the time, "In 2016, President Trump was exactly who the Republican Party needed at the time. For too long, Republicans had been marginalized. Then Trump came along and reminded us how to fight what we believe. We are better off now for what President Trump accomplished while he was president." He continued, "However, the Republican Party has entered a season of change. We’re at a pivotal juncture, and most of the Republicans I know are now looking for new leadership with a new vision at the top of the ticket. Nikki Haley has that vision, and she’s going to be an outstanding President." Fox News' Paul Steinhauser and Louis Casiano contributed to this report. Posted by Gabriele Regalbuto Share

Who is Dean Phillips? Minnesota Democratic Rep. Dean Phillips is challenging Biden in the Democratic primary, and New Hampshire represents his top opportunity. "I am excited to announce my candidacy for president in 2024. It’s time to put our country back together again – and use our differences to make us stronger. It’s time to repair America," Phillips said in a launch video posted on social media in late October. He officially declared his bid for president in New Hampshire the following day. Phillips is a millionaire businessman and co-founder of a gelato company turned three-term member of Congress. He was just six months old when his father, Artie Pfefer, was killed in action in the Vietnam War in 1969. In 1972, Phillips mother married Eddie Phillips, and Dean Phillips became an adopted heir of Phillips Distilling Company, the family business known for producing the country's first brand of schnapps. After the passing of his adoptive father, Phillips left the family distilling company to join a small gelato business in which his father had invested. As a first-time politician, Phillips defeated six-term Republican Rep. Erik Paulsen in 2018 during a blue wave election in which the Democrats won back the House majority. Fox News' Paul Steinhauser contributed to this report. Posted by Gabriele Regalbuto Share

Gov. Burgum praises 'sophisticated' New Hampshire voters who are 'going to send a message' North Dakota Gov. Doug Burgum praised New Hampshire voters ahead of the state's primary Tuesday, telling Fox News Digital that residents of the state are some of the most informed when they head to the polls. "The thing that's great about New Hampshire voters is they're so sophisticated," Burgum said while attending a rally in support of former President Donald Trump. "I mean, it's not just that they're, you know, watching cable news. I mean, they're reading stories. "They're on the ground. They understand the issues. They understand the differences, because everybody over the years has campaigned here in both parties. They're close to the big media markets like Boston. They see what's going on." Burgum said he and has wife have lived the experience while traveling around the state to connect with voters, noting that the level of knowledge extends to voters both "young and old." Posted by Michael Lee Share

Seen and Unseen: Judge Judy would vote for Nikki Haley even if she were a ‘frog’ Posted by Michael Lee Share

Gov. Ron DeSantis withdrew from 2024 presidential race and endorsed Donald Trump on Sunday Florida Gov. Ron DeSantis withdrew from the 2024 presidential campaign Sunday afternoon in a video posted to X, formerly known as Twitter. DeSantis took second in Iowa last week on caucus night. "Now, following our second place finish in Iowa, we've prayed and deliberating on the way forward," DeSantis said. "If there was anything I could do to produce a favorable outcome, more campaign stops, more interviews, I would do it. But I can't ask our supporters to volunteer their time and donate their resources if we don't have a clear path to victory." He continued, "This is America's time for choosing. We can choose to allow a border invasion, or we can choose to stop it. We can choose reckless borrowing and spending, or we can choose to limit government and lower inflation. We can choose political indoctrination, or we can choose classical education." After the suspension of his campaign, DeSantis added, "It's clear to me that a majority of Republican primary voters want to give Donald Trump another chance." "While I've had disagreements with Donald Trump, such as on the coronavirus pandemic, and his elevation of Anthony Fauci, Trump is superior to the current incumbent, Joe Biden. That is clear," DeSantis continued. "I signed a pledge to support the Republican nominee, and I will honor that pledge. He has my endorsement because we can't go back to the old Republican guard of yesteryear." Posted by Gabriele Regalbuto Share

Trump vs Haley: Where they stand in the GOP primary battle and how they match up with Biden With Florida Governor Ron DeSantis dropping out of the race on Sunday the 21st, the 2024 Republican Presidential Primary officially became a two person race between former President Donald Trump and his former U.N. Ambassador Nikki Haley. Trump has maintained that Tuesday will be a smash victory for his campaign but New Hampshire’s voter registration numbers, where independent voters make up roughly 40% of the electorate, could be fertile ground for a candidate like Haley. ”I think it puts a nail in her coffin," New Hampshire based GOP strategist Mike Dennehy said of Haley. "I don’t think she’ll be able to keep under 50%. And I think there’s a very good chance that Trump hits 60% on Tuesday, which will signal the end of the Haley campaign and virtually seal the deal for the Trump nomination." However, New Hampshire — where independent voters who make up roughly 40% of the electorate can vote in either major party's contest and have long played an influential role in the state's storied presidential primary — may be fertile ground for Haley. Veteran New Hampshire-based Republican consultant Jim Merrill told Fox News that DeSantis' departure from the race "narrows Haley's margin for error here. Many, if not most, of DeSantis voters are going to migrate over to Trump. And so it’s critical for her to do well in New Hampshire to give her some momentum heading into South Carolina." Fox News’ Paul Steinhauser contributed to this report. Posted by Matteo Cina Share

Caucuses vs primary elections What is a caucus? Caucuses are the most hyped presidential contests in the country but also among the most confusing. They essentially function like traditional party primaries because residents cast ballots, and the candidate with the most ballots wins. However, residents simply don’t walk into a polling site to cast their ballot, then exit. Caucus night is more time-consuming because it includes discussing candidates, picking convention delegates and dealing with state party business. And the parties, which run the caucuses, have un