Pinned Israeli Navy unit repels Hamas terrorists infiltrating by sea on morning of attack, IDF video shows An Israeli Navy squad stopped a number of Hamas terrorists from reaching Israel’s coastline on the morning of Oct. 7, according to footage released by the Israel Defense Forces (IDF) over the weekend. The IDF said the video shows soldiers in the Snapir unit spraying machine gun fire on Hamas terrorists as they swam toward the Israeli coast near the city of Ashdod. "Israeli Navy ‘Snapir‘ Unit opened fire on terrorists who were swimming toward the shoreline in an attempt to infiltrate Israel by sea," the IDF said. "Soldiers thwarted a number of terrorists, preventing them from reaching the coastline." The video shows Hamas speedboats on fire. Surviving terrorists were seen swimming in the sea, along with Hamas divers, as the Snapir unit opened fire and used depth charges from small Defender-class boats, the Times of Israel reported. Fox News' Stephen Sorace contributed to this report. Posted by Anders Hagstrom Share

Blinken reaffirms support for Israel in meeting with Netanyahu, discusses humanitarian aid The State Department offered details of Secretary of State Tony Blinken's meeting with Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu on Monday. Blinken traveled to Israel for the second time in as many weeks on Monday to meet with Netanyahu regarding Israel's war against Hamas. State Department Spokesman Matthew Miller says Blinken riterated U.S. support for Israel's right to defend itself and also discussed humanitarian issues. "The Secretary underlined his firm support for Israel’s right to defend itself from Hamas’ terrorism and reaffirmed U.S. determination to provide the Israeli government with what it needs to protect its citizens.The Secretary discussed with Prime Minister Netanyahu the United States’ close coordination with the U.N. and regional partners to facilitate the provision of humanitarian aid to civilians. The Secretary also discussed our commitment to the safe and speedy release of those held hostage by Hamas," Miller said. Netanyahu will hold a call with Russian President Vladimir Putin later Monday. The State Department did not clarify whether Blinken discussed that call with Netanyahu. Posted by Anders Hagstrom Share

Israeli victims of Hamas violence include a dancing daughter, a jewelry designer, others More than 4,000 people have died in the ongoing war between Israel and Hamas after the terror group carried out a brutal attack on Oct. 7, which included the slaughter of more than 1,400 Israelis in communities surrounding Gaza. The deaths also include 260 attendees of a music festival that Hamas terrorists killed that same day. While the identities of all those who have been killed in the violence or taken hostage by the terror group are unknown to the public, the Israeli government has identified several victims as: a daughter who initially decided not to go to the Tribe of Nova music festival but changed her mind at the last minute, an Israeli jewelry designer described as "the softest soul," an elderly couple married more than 50 years, a third-generation Israeli soldier, and many others. As officials have identified those who died, remain missing or those taken hostage by Hamas, surviving family members have begun to shed light on who they were, their personalities and their lives. Karin Journo, 24, recently fractured her leg and talked herself out of going with her friends to the Tribe of Nova music festival on Saturday, Oct 7. Content with her decision, she even sold her ticket. However, a week before the event, she changed her mind — a decision that changed her life forever. Before going silent, she texted her loved ones: "To the whole family, I want to say that I love you a lot, because I am not coming home." Fox News' Lawrence Richard contributed to this report. Posted by Anders Hagstrom Share

Israeli government distributes thousands of rifles to citizens near Gaza, Lebanon borders The Israeli government is distributing roughly 10,000 rifles to Israeli citizens living in towns near its northern and southern borders, officials announced Monday. Israeli Minister of National Security Itamar Ben-Gvir purchased the rifles early last week and has expedited the process for "hundreds of thousands" of Israelis to be approved to carry firearms. "I call on everyone who is eligible [to get] a life-saving weapon," he said in a statement on X, the platform formerly known as Twitter. The 10,000 rifles are being distributed to civilian security teams, some of which were able to fight off Hamas terrorists last week using only pistols. Members of at least one team told the Times of Israel that the Israeli Defense Forces had taken their rifles sometime prior to the Hamas assault. Posted by Anders Hagstrom Share

Breaking News Israel's Netanyahu to hold call with Vladimir Putin amid war on Hamas Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu will speak with Russian President Vladimir Putin in a phone call later Monday. Senior Israeli officials tell Fox News Digital that the call will likely take place Monday evening. No details have been offered regarding what either party seeks to gain from the conversation. It will be the first time the two leaders have spoken since Hamas' October 7 attack. The call comes as Israeli Defense Forces appear poised to carry out a ground operation in Northern Gaza. Putin offered Russia to serve as a mediating party between Hamas and Israel this weekend. "What matters now is to stop the bloodshed," Putin said Friday. Meanwhile, Netanyahu has vowed to "exterminate the bloody monsters" of Hamas, and the U.S. has backed up Israeli's right to defend itself and retaliate against Hamas terrorists. Fox News' Yonat Friling contributed to this report. Posted by Anders Hagstrom Share

Lebanese military targets 20 Hezbollah rocket sites: Report The Lebanese military has destroyed 20 different rocket launching sites that Hezbollah was using to attack Israel from Southern Lebanon, accoridng to Lebanese media. Hezbollah, a powerful Iran-backed terrorist group, has threatened to join Hamas in the war against Israel. The group has launched anti-tank guided missiles over the Lebanon-Israel border in recent days, leading to Israeli reprisals. The reported attacks on Hezbollah rocket positions indicate that there is disagreement in Lebanon regarding whether to challenge Israel. The news comes as Hezbollah began destroying surveillance cameras on several Israeli army posts along the border on Monday. Hezbollah’s military media arm released a video showing snipers destroying surveillance cameras placed on five points along the Lebanon-Israel border, including one outside the Israeli town of Metula. Hezbollah’s aim appears to be to prevent the Israeli army from monitoring movements on the Lebanese side of the border. The Associated Press contributed to this report. Posted by Anders Hagstrom Share

Catholic Patriarch in Jerusalem offers to be exchanged for Israeli children held hostage in Gaza Cardinal Pierbattista Pizzaballa, the Patriarch of Jerusalem, offered to exchange himself for Israeli children taken hostage by Hamas in Gaza on Monday. Pizzaballa, who represents Pope Francis in the Holy Land, made the offer in a video conference with Italian journalists on Monday. "I am ready for an exchange, anything, if this can lead to freedom, to bring the children home....The first thing to do is to try to win the release of the hostages, otherwise there will be no way of stopping [an escalation]." Posted by Anders Hagstrom Share

FBI director Wray warns of potential Hamas copycat attacks in US FBI Director Christopher Wray warned that the FBI is receiving a spike in reported domestic terror threats following Hamas' October 7 attack on Israel. Wray made the comments Saturday, warning Americans to be vigilant as "lone actors" in the U.S. may take inspiration from the Hamas assault. "In this heightened environment, there’s no question we’re seeing an increase in reported threats, and we have to be on the lookout, especially for lone actors who may take inspiration from recent events to commit violence of their own," he said. "And I’d encourage you to stay vigilant, because as the first line of defense in protecting our communities, you’re often the first to see the signs that someone may be mobilizing to violence. And I’d also ask you to continue sharing any intelligence or observations you may have." "On our end, we’re committed to doing the same, so that together, we can safeguard our communities," Wray said. The warning came a day after major U.S. cities, including New York, were on heightened security and increased police presence Friday amid concern over demonstrations related to the conflict. A former Hamas leader had also called for Muslims around the world to take to the streets in support of Palestinians and consider Oct. 13 a "Day of Jihad." Fox News' Danielle Wallace contributed to this report. Posted by Anders Hagstrom Share

Biden postpones Colorado trip as Israeli invasion of Gaza appears imminent President Biden has postponed his planned visit to Colorado on Monday and will instead remain at the White House as Israeli forces appear poised to invade Northern Gaza. White House officials say Biden will participate in national security meetings throughout the day. His planned trip to Colorado would have been focused on his Bidenomics agenda. "The President’s trip to Colorado is postponed and it will be rescheduled. The President will remain at the White House to participate in national security meetings," a White House official told Fox News Digital in a statement. Fox News' Sarah Tobianski contributed to this report. Posted by Anders Hagstrom Share

CNN's Jake Tapper presses Biden's NatSec adviser on 'priority' of American hostages held by Hamas CNN's Jake Tapper pressed President Biden's national security adviser, Jake Sullivan, about whether hostages taken by Hamas were a "priority" for the Biden administration on Sunday. "Is rescuing the hostages a priority at all? Israeli news media like Haaretz, they say it doesn’t seem like it at all," Tapper asked. "And frankly, Jake, if my kids were being held hostage in Gaza, and as you know, there are Americans being held hostage in Gaza right now, I'd want you to send in the Navy SEALs. What’s the conversation like in the White House about the U.S. conducting any sort of operations in order to save Americans being held hostage in Gaza?" Sullivan responded and said Biden has been clear about wanting to get Americans back to the U.S. safely. "The Israelis are bombing the crap out of Gaza, I mean, it doesn’t seem like saving the hostages are a priority at all right now," Tapper asserted. "Well, for President Biden, they are a priority. They’re the highest possible priority. And he has sent hostage experts to coordinate and consult with the Israeli government on hostage recovery efforts. He’s also made sure that our diplomats are in touch with third countries in the region to explore avenues for their safe release. I have to be cautious about how much I can say about certain efforts he’s undertaking, because we want to protect those efforts to give us the best possible chance of getting our people home," Sullivan responded. He added that the U.S. does not currently know the locations of the American hostages. Fox News' Hanna Panreck contributed to this report. Posted by Anders Hagstrom Share

Biden to families of US hostages in Gaza: 'We're workin like hell on it' President Biden spoke with family members of American citizens being held hostage in Gaza, telling them in a video call that the U.S. is "workin' like hell" to rescue them. News of Biden's Zoom call with the family members came in a "60 Minutes" interview released Monday. The call, which included 14 families, lasted roughly an hour. "I'm saying we're gonna do everything in our power to find those who are still alive and set them free. Everything in our power. And-- I'm not gonna go into the detail of that, but there's-- we're workin' like hell on it," Biden said. When Biden took the call, the situation in Israel had at least 29 dead Americans and 14 missing. One of those missing was identified as deceased over the weekend, however, and the count now sits at at least 30 killed and 13 missing. "Why do you feel so strongly about speaking to these families personally on Zoom?" CBS News host Scott Pelley asked in the interview. Because I think they have to know that the president of the United States of America cares deeply about what's happening. Deeply. We have to communicate to the world this is critical. this is not even hum-- human behavior. it's pure barbarism. And we're gonna do everything in our power to get them home if we can find them," Biden responded. Posted by Anders Hagstrom Share

NatSec expert warns Iran may 'break out' after Israel weakened in two-front war Iran is planning to "break out" in the Middle East if Israel is weakened by a two-front war with Hamas and Hezbollah, predicted Heritage Foundation National Security vice president James Carafano. Carafano made statement during a Monday appearance on Fox Business, telling host Maria Bartiromo that Iran is the most likely candidate for masterminding the October 7 attack on Israel. Iran has a long history of funding both Hamas and Hezbollah, the two terrorist groups now assailing Israeli Defense Forces. "If [Iran] wanted to set the conditions for [a breakout], what would be the optimum conditions?" Carafano posited. "They would have two-front war against Israel that would diminish and weaken the Israelis, and hopefully humiliate the United States. And they would do that at a politically sensitive time for the U.S., right up on the eve of a U.S. election. That's when they break out, and that's what I think is behind this strategy." Posted by Anders Hagstrom Share

MLB and Team Israel pitcher saddened over Hamas attack reactions: ‘Not a good showing for humanity’ Zack Weiss, a pitcher for the Boston Red Sox and a member of the 2021 Team Israel Olympic team, spoke with Fox News Digital and expressed sadness over those attempting to justify Hamas' unprecedented terrorist attack last week. "I would say, No. 1, is just disappointed, sad," Weiss told Fox News Digital on Monday. "It’s a bummer that there is some sort of justification for what took place," Weiss continued, expressing carefulness in his word choice. "I think anybody who has seen the videos of what’s happened is familiar with any of the stories that you’ve heard from people, that’s just one-on-one disgusting terrorism at its core. It’s personal, it’s inhumane, it’s just so direct. And that action, in my opinion, is just rooted so deeply in hatred that I don’t really see how we’re seeing political organizations justify it in a political sense." The Democratic Socialists of America (DSA) expressed "solidarity with Palestine" in a post on X, formerly Twitter, saying that Oct. 7 "events" were a "direct result of Israel’s apartheid regime — a regime that receives billions in funding from the United States." Dozens of other organizations, from college campuses to political parties, echoed the sentiment in blaming Israel. Fox News' Joe Morgan contributed to this report. Posted by Anders Hagstrom Share

Breaking News Rafah Crossing at Egypt-Gaza border closed after brief re-opening as residents seek to flee invasion The Rafah Crossing at the Egypt-Gaza border has been closed after a brief re-opening early Monday morning as residents flee the impending Israeli invasion. The crossing was the last remaining exit for Gazans. Israel warned residents to flee Northern Gaza throughout the weekend as Israeli Defense Forces prepared a ground invasion, and there were widespread reports of Hamas terrorists hampering or outright blocking Gazans from leaving. Egypt and all other nearby Arab nations have so far refused to take on large numbers of Gazan refugees displaced in the conlfict. The crossing had originally been shut down due to Israel's retaliatory airstrikes against Hamas earlier this week. "We anticipate that the situation at the Rafah crossing will remain fluid and unpredictable and it is unclear whether, or for how long, travelers will be permitted to transit the crossing," the U.S. Office of Palestinian Affairs said in a statement. "If you assess it to be safe, you may wish to move closer to the Rafah border crossing – there may be very little notice if the crossing opens and it may only open for a limited time." Posted by Anders Hagstrom Share

Senate to hit the ground running this week on funding packages, negotiations on aid to Israel The Senate is back in session Tuesday, and funding the government with aid to Israel and Ukraine will be at the heart of negotiations. A source familiar with the talks told Fox News Digital the upper chamber will be awaiting the official supplemental request from the Biden administration before an official package is drafted, which could take more than a week. The upper chamber was briefed on a call last week by the administration on a "mega package" request that would combine aid to Israel, Ukraine, Taiwan and border security, according to a source familiar. Expected floor action for the week is on three separate appropriations bills combined into one legislative package for the 2024 fiscal year, which includes funding for the Food and Drug Administration, and the Departments of Veterans Affairs, Transportation, and Housing and Urban Development. The temporary spending patch that the upper chamber agreed on before the Sept. 30 deadline will expire on Nov. 17. On Tuesday, the Senate Intelligence Committee will convene for a closed-door briefing. Senate leaders will resume their weekly luncheons with a corresponding press conference, where aid to Israel and Ukraine is likely to be a topic of discussion. Fox News' Jamie Joseph contributed to this report. Posted by Landon Mion Share

FLASHBACK: Nikki Haley warned United Nations of Hamas threat to Israel, sought to label terror group Former United Nations Ambassador Nikki Haley, in 2018, warned the United Nations Security Council about the terror threat the Iran-backed Hamas posed to Israel, while also seeking to label it a terror group both in the chamber and the General Assembly -- but the efforts were snubbed or shut down by other members. Haley, serving as the U.S. ambassador to the U.N. in 2018, told the body that Hamas "has been inciting violence for years," long before the U.S. moved to shift its embassy to Jerusalem as it did in 2018. She sounded the alarm about media reports of plans Hamas made to invade Israel if rioters could break through. "They have reported that Hamas maps and social media show the fastest routes to reach Israeli communities in case demonstrators make it through the security fence. They have reported on Hamas messages over loudspeakers that urge demonstrators to burst through the fence, falsely claiming Israeli soldiers were fleeing, when in fact, they were not," she told the Council. She noted incidents where Molotov cocktails were put on kites and flown into Israel, and how key crossing points had been attacked. She also rebuffed calls for additional restraint by Israel by some on the Council -- calls that have been echoed in recent days since the terror attack by Hamas. "I ask my colleagues here in the Security Council, who among us would accept this type of activity on your border? No one would. No country in this chamber would act with more restraint than Israel has. In fact, the records of several countries here today suggest they would be much less restrained." Hamas is not labeled or sanctioned as a terror group by the United Nations Security Council, unlike ISIS and Al Qaeda. Fox News' Adam Shaw contributed to this report. Posted by Landon Mion Share

Blinken back in Israel as war intensifies; humanitarian crisis worsens U.S. Secretary of State Antony Blinken has arrived back in Israel on Monday, where he is expected to meet with Israeli officials as the country's war with Hamas in Gaza continues to intensify. The Secretary will meet with Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu, Israeli President Isaac Herzog, Defense Minister Yoav Gallant, and Opposition Leader Yair Lapid in Tel Aviv, a U.S. official told Fox News. His visit is to show continued U.S. support for Israel, America's closest Middle Eastern ally. The meeting comes ahead of a potential Israeli ground invasion of Gaza as Netanyahu has vowed to eliminate Hamas terrorists, saying he will "exterminate the bloody monsters." On Sunday, Blinken was interviewed by Randa Abul Azm of Al-Arabiya, who asked the secretary about efforts to get civilians out of harm’s way in Gaza, as Israel stages a ground offensive. "Israel is not blocking the departure of foreign nationals," he said. "The problem has been Hamas has disrupted that, and of course, we have to make the necessary arrangements." "At the same time, Egypt is fully prepared – and we’re working with them – to get assistance in," Blinken said. "And we’re putting in place a system – working with the United Nations, working with Egypt, working with other countries – to make sure that the assistance can get into Gaza, get to the people who need it." He added: "And the fact of the matter is this: What does Hamas do? Hamas makes sure that all of its critical leaders, that its command centers, that its weapons, its ammunitions are all located in residential areas, in residential buildings or buried underneath hospitals, schools, and supermarkets. They know – they are using Palestinians of Gaza as human shields, and that, too, is disgraceful." Posted by Lawrence Richard Share

Israel's forces announce plan to evacuate residents of northern Israel from Lebanese border Israel's Ministry of Defense and the Israeli Defense Force released a joint statement Monday announcing a plan to evacuate residents located near the Lebanese border to state-funded guesthouses. "The National Emergency Management Authority (NEMA) of the Ministry of Defense and the IDF are announcing the implementation of a plan to evacuate residents of northern Israel who live in the area up to 2 kilometers from the Lebanese border to state-funded guesthouses," the statement read. Minister of Defense Yoav Gallant approved the plan's implementation. The Northern Command notified the heads of the local authorities of the plan, which will be implemented by the heads of the local municipalities, the Ministry of Interior and the National Emergency Management Authority of the Ministry of Defense. The 28 communities impacted by the plan are Ghajar, Dishon, Kfar Yuval, Margaliot, Metula, Avivim, Dovev, Ma’ayan Baruch, Bara’m, Manara, Yiftach, Malkia, Misgav Am, Yir’on, Dafna, Arab al-Aramshe, Shlomi, Netu’a, Ya’ara, Shtula, Matat, Zari’t, Shomera, Betzet, Adamit, Rosh HaNikram, Hanita and Kfar Giladi. More than 3,600 people have been killed since Hamas launched its attack against Israel on October 7, leading to retaliatory action from Israeli forces. Thousands more have been wounded, and many others have been taken hostage by Hamas and raped, tortured and murdered. Posted by Landon Mion Share

Dolphins' Tua Tagovailoa touches on Israel after win: 'This world needs prayer' Miami Dolphins star Tua Tagovailoa took a moment in his postgame press conference to talk about the victims of the Hamas terror attack in Israel last weekend. Tagovailoa had just led the Dolphins to a 42-21 win over the Carolina Panthers – in a game in which he had three touchdown passes and 262 passing yards. He started to talk about the touchdown pass to Tyreek Hill and then veered off to the other topic. "I kind of want to also just bring to the attention – I didn’t really realize how bad things were in Israel – and just wanted to bring to attention for those who don’t necessarily understand things that are going on, that it really is bad, and if you don’t understand, if you go on Google, you look, you search and you read about what’s going on in this world. This world needs prayer," he said. "I don’t know what we’ve come to, but just my thoughts, my prayers are out with those people in Israel. I know the Ukraine and Russia war is still going on as well, and just wanted to bring notice that although we have the freedom to do this here, play football and be able to have the freedom to do these things, that to come back into reality and think that’s where we all are here in this world. Just want to bring that to the attention." Fox News' Ryan Gaydos contributed to this report. Posted by Landon Mion Share

Blinken says US 'actively working' to move Gaza civilians from harm's way, provide humanitarian aid U.S. Secretary of State Antony Blinken said the American government is supporting Israel's right to defend itself against attacks from Hamas terrorists, and that American officials are working to help Gaza civilians with evacuation efforts and humanitarian assistance. "We stand with Israel as it defends itself. The United States is also actively working to ensure the people of Gaza can get out of harm’s way and the assistance they need — food, water, medicine — can get in. Hamas does not care if Palestinians suffer," Blinken wrote on X, the platform formerly known as Twitter. Civilians in Gaza were urged by Israeli forces last week to evacuate the area in preparation of Israel's potential ground attack, although Hamas has reportedly prevented residents from leaving. The Rafah Crossing connecting Egypt and Gaza will reopen shortly, providing the last remaining exit for Palestinians wanting to evacuate the violence ahead of the potential ground attack from Israel. The crossing's reopening also allows humanitarian aid to pass through to Gaza. More than 3,600 people have been killed since Hamas launched its largest attack against Israel in decades, leading to retaliatory action from Israeli forces. Thousands more have been wounded, and many others have been taken hostage by Hamas and raped, tortured and murdered. Posted by Landon Mion Share

Breaking News Rafah Crossing at Egypt-Gaza border temporarily reopens as exit route The Rafah Crossing connecting Egypt and Gaza temporarily reopened at 9 a.m. local time Monday, providing the last remaining exit for Palestinians wanting to evacuate the violence in Israel ahead of a potential ground attack from Israeli forces. Civilians in Gaza were urged by Israeli forces last week to evacuate the area in preparation of the ground attack, although Hamas terrorists have reportedly prevented residents from leaving. With the crossing reopening, humanitarian aid will now be able to pass through to Gaza. The crossing had been shut down for Israel's retaliatory airstrikes against Hamas earlier this week. "We anticipate that the situation at the Rafah crossing will remain fluid and unpredictable and it is unclear whether, or for how long, travelers will be permitted to transit the crossing," the U.S. Office of Palestinian Affairs said in a statement. "If you assess it to be safe, you may wish to move closer to the Rafah border crossing – there may be very little notice if the crossing opens and it may only open for a limited time." The U.S., Israel and Egypt reached an agreement for a temporary ceasefire as the crossing reopens after more than a week of violence in Israel stemming from a surprise attack by Hamas terrorists, Fox News Channel reported early Monday morning. Israel Prime Minister wrote Monday morning on X, the platform formerly known as Twitter, that "there is no ceasefire" in response to reports of a temporary ceasefire while the Rafah Crossing is open as an exit route. More than 3,600 people have been killed since Hamas launched its largest attack against the Jewish State in decades, leading to retaliatory action from Israeli forces. Thousands more have been wounded, and many others have been taken hostage by Hamas and raped, tortured and murdered. Posted by Landon Mion Share

IDF seized weapons cache, supplies from Hamas during terror group's attack on Israel Israel Defense Forces confiscated a large cache of weapons and supplies from Hamas terrorists amid the attack against Israel, the group announced Sunday. The seized weapons account for just 20% of the ones used by Hamas to kill Israelis, the IDF wrote on X, formerly known as Twitter. All the confiscated weapons were used in the Oct. 7 attack against Israel, according to the IDF. Hundreds of documents and certificates, and hundreds of cell phones, other forms of communication and cameras used by Hamas have also been confiscated. Posted by Landon Mion Share

‘Squad’ member slammed for pushing misinformation: Instinct was to ‘try to blame the Israelis’ ‘Squad’ member Ilhan Omar, D-Minn., drew criticism for retweeting a photo of dead children with the caption "CHILD GENOCIDE IN PALESTINE." The photo showed seven dead children wrapped in white and claimed they were part of the "614 Palestinian children murdered by the Israeli [IDF] forces." A community note from X, formerly known as Twitter, stated that the picture was from a 2013 sarin gas attack in Ghouta, Syria, and not from the Israel-Hamas war. Fellow ‘Squad’ member Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, D-N.Y., warned about the "incredibly high" amount of misinformation on social media about the ongoing war and urged her followers to "pause" and "check" for verification. "If you see a claim, photo, or video that triggers a strong emotional reaction, take a moment to pause and check for veracity/confirmation from multiple sources," she wrote on X. Omar has since un-retweeted the photo after criticism. Posted by Landon Mion Share

Florida Governor Ron DeSantis rescues over 260 Americans stuck in Israel Florida Governor Ron DeSantis announced on Sunday that he helped successfully transport "hundreds" of Americans from Israel amid the war against Hamas. "I am proud of how quickly we have been able to activate resources and do what the federal government could not – get Floridians and other Americans back home, reunited with their families, free of charge," DeSantis said in a press release. The governor announced the news in a video posted to X. Speaking from an airport in Tampa on Sunday night, DeSantis said that he was getting ready to welcome the Americans back on U.S. soil. "We are having our first flight of people being rescued from Israel, it has landed. Over 260 people that wanted to get back to the United States and couldn't do it," DeSantis said. "There was a devoid [sic] of leadership, so we stepped up and led." "We're happy to be able to deliver that. So we're getting ready to welcome them back to the United States of America," he added. Fox News' Landon Mion contributed to this report. Posted by Andrea Vacchiano Share

Israeli ambassador lambastes UN official over Gaza post: 'Have you been living under a rock?' Israel's Ambassador to the United Nations Gilad Erdan called out a United Nations official who reportedly failed to condemn Hamas in a statement amid its war against Israel. UN Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator Martin Griffiths had made a social media post calling attention to Israel's blockade of the Gaza Strip. "The specter of death is hanging over #Gaza," his post on X read. "With no water, no power, no food and no medicine, thousands will die. Plain and simple." Erdan responded by criticizing the "double standards" that he accused Griffiths of having. "Thousands of Israelis were murdered and maimed in the Hamas Nazis' barbaric terror attack. And tens of thousands more will be massacred in the future if this savage terror group is not obliterated," Erdan wrote. "Have you been living under a rock? Your double standards truly know no bounds…" "Where was your outcry when Hamas funneled all UN funds to dig terror tunnels and manufacture rockets targeting Israeli civilians? When Hamas diverted every resource – water, energy, civilian infrastructure – from the Gazan population to their terror capabilities?" Erdan added. Posted by Andrea Vacchiano Share

President Biden considers visiting Israel amid war against Hamas: official President Biden is reportedly considering visiting Israel as the country continues battling Hamas, according to a White House official. The senior administration official told the Associated Press that the plans haven't been finalized yet. Biden and his administration have been supportive of Israel since the country was attacked by terrorists on October 7. Despite the support, Biden has said it would be a mistake for Israel to reoccupy Gaza. “I think it’d be a big mistake,” the president said in a "60 Minutes" interview that aired on Sunday. “Look, what happened in Gaza, in my view, is Hamas, and the extreme elements of Hamas don’t represent all the Palestinian people. And I think that it would be a mistake for Israel to occupy Gaza again.” “Taking out the extremists ... is a necessary requirement," he added. The Associated Press contributed to this report. Posted by Andrea Vacchiano Share

30 Americans dead as Israel-Hamas war goes on, 13 others missing A U.S. Department of State spokesperson announced that at least 30 Americans have died as a result of the Israel-Hamas war, which began on October 7. "At this time, we can confirm the deaths of 30 U.S. citizens," the statement read. "We extend our deepest condolences to the victims and to the families of all those affected." The spokesperson also said that 13 American citizens are still unaccounted for, and officials are actively searching for them. "The U.S. government is working around the clock to determine their whereabouts and is working with the Israeli government on every aspect of the hostage crisis, including sharing intelligence and deploying experts from across the United States government to advise the Israeli government on hostage recovery efforts," the statement added. Fox News' Nicholas Kalman contributed to this report. Posted by Andrea Vacchiano Share

Secretary of State Antony Blinken blames Hamas for blocked evacuations of foreigners in Gaza Secretary of State Antony Blinken argued that Hamas was to blame for the confinement of foreign nationals in the Gaza Strip during an interview on Sunday. The secretary of state was being questioned by Al-Arabiya's Randa Abul Azm, who asked him about how the United States is helping foreigners get out of Gaza. "The efforts to evacuate foreign nationals from Gaza Strip has been blocked by Israelis," Azm said to Blinken. "Israel is not blocking the departure of foreign nationals," the Biden official asserted. "The problem has been Hamas has disrupted that, and of course, we have to make the necessary arrangements." Blinken added that Egypt, which borders Gaza along with Israel, is prepared to help foreigners get out of the war-torn territory. "At the same time, Egypt is fully prepared – and we’re working with them – to get assistance in," Blinken added. "And we’re putting in place a system – working with the United Nations, working with Egypt, working with other countries – to make sure that the assistance can get into Gaza, get to the people who need it." Fox News Digital's Greg Wehner contributed to this report. Posted by Andrea Vacchiano Share

Palestinian president says Hamas terrorists do not represent Palestinians amid war with Israel Palestinian Authority President Mahmoud Abbas asserted that Hamas terrorist attacks do not represent his people, Palestinian outlet WAFA reported on Sunday. Abbas, who is also chairman of the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO), reportedly told Venezuelan President Nicolas Maduro on a phone call that the PLO is "the sole legitimate representative of the Palestinian people." "The president affirmed his rejection of the killing of civilians on both sides and called for the release of civilians, prisoners and detainees on both sides," WAFA added. Abbas previously told the King of Jordan on Thursday that he "reject[s] the practices of killing civilians or abusing them on both sides because they contravene morals, religion and international law." "We renounce violence and adhere to international legitimacy, peaceful popular resistance, and political action as a path to achieving our national goals," Abbas was previously quoted as saying. Reuters contributed to this report. Posted by Andrea Vacchiano Share

Israel-Hamas war: United Nations Secretary-General says Middle East is 'on the verge of the abyss' United Nations Secretary-General António Guterres made "two strong humanitarian appeals" to Israel and Hamas on Sunday, as the war between the two continues. "In this dramatic moment, as we are on the verge of the abyss in the Middle East, it is my duty as Secretary-General of the United Nations to make two strong humanitarian appeals," Guterres said in a statement. "To Hamas, the hostages must be immediately released without conditions," he wrote. "To Israel, rapid and unimpeded access for humanitarian aid must be granted for humanitarian supplies and workers for the sake of the civilians in Gaza." Gaza has been running out of electricity, water and food since Israel blocked entry into the Gaza Strip last week. Guterres explained that the UN has stocks of food, water, medical supplies and more across the Levant. "These goods can be dispatched within hours," the statement added. "To ensure delivery, our selfless staff on the ground, along with NGO partners, need to be able to bring these supplies into and throughout Gaza safely, and without impediment to deliver to those in need." "Each one of these two objectives are valid in themselves," Guterres affirmed. "They should not become bargaining chips and they must be implemented because it is the right thing to do." Posted by Andrea Vacchiano Share

Israeli foreign minister blasts Vatican not issuing 'clear and unequivocal' condemnation of Hamas Israel’s foreign minister Eli Cohen reportedly called out the Vatican for not issuing a "clear and unequivocal" condemnation of Hamas after their terrorists began attacking Israel last week. According to the Times of Israel, Cohen told Paul Gallagher, the Holy See’s Secretary for Relations, that Israelis expect the Vatican to "come out with a clear and unequivocal condemnation of the murderous terrorist actions." "It is unacceptable that you put out a statement expressing worry primarily for Gazan civilians while Israel is burying 1,300 who were murdered," Cohen said, according to the Foreign Ministry. Pope Francis had recently affirmed Israel's right to defend itself and offered prayers to victims. "I continue to follow what is happening in Israel and Palestine with tears and apprehension: many people killed, others injured," the pope said on Wednesday. "I pray for those families who have seen a feast day transformed into a day of mourning, and I ask that the hostages be released immediately." At least 1,400 Israelis have been killed since Hamas launched a surprise attack last Saturday, on the Jewish holiday of Simchat Torah. Palestinian authorities say that more than 2,300 Palestinians have been killed, with over 9,000 wounded. Fox News Digital's Greg Wehner contributed to this report. Posted by Andrea Vacchiano Share

Biden's NSA pressed on previous comments about 'quieter' Middle East: 'So far off the mark' NBC News' Kristen Welker pressed President Biden's National Security Adviser Jake Sullivan about how he was "so far off the mark" in describing the conflict in the Middle East as "quieter" today than it has been in two decades. "Jake, as you know, there’s been a lot of discussion about how this attack could have been missed. I want to play you some remarks that you made eight days before the attack and get your reaction on the other side," Welker asked before playing the clip. Sullivan said the Middle East was quieter than it has been in a long time about a week before Hamas attacked Israel. "The Middle East region is quieter today than it has been in two decades. Now challenges remain. Iran’s nuclear weapons program, and the tensions between Israelis and Palestinians, but the amount of time I have to spend on crisis and conflict in the Middle East today compared to any of my predecessors going back to 9/11 is significantly reduced," he said. "Jake, why was your assessment there so far off the mark?" Welker asked. "Well, first, Kristen, I made those comments in the context of developments in the wider Middle East region over the last few years after two decades that involved a civil war in Yemen and a massive humanitarian catastrophe, a civil war in Syria and a massive refugee crisis, an invasion and insurgency in Iraq, a NATO military operation in Libya. Iranian-backed attacks on both Saudi and the UAE as well as many other steps including the rise of a terrorist Caliphate that actually occupied a huge amount of territory," he said. He said that he also clarified that it was "for now" and said it could all change. Fox News' Hanna Panreck contributed to this report. Posted by Anders Hagstrom Share

PM Netanyahu vows Israeli ground invasion will 'exterminate the bloody monsters' of Hamas Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu says Israeli forces are ready to "exterminate the bloody monsters" of Hamas in a ground invasion of Gaza that now appears imminent. Netanyahu made the comments during a meeting of his war cabinet on Sunday, saying the military stands ready to act at "any moment." Israel spent the weekend warning civilians in Gaza to move south as quickly as possible, as Israeli forces plan to invade northern Gaza by land, sea and air in the coming days. "[We] are ready to act at any moment, to exterminate the bloody monsters that rose up against us," Netanyahu said. "Hamas thought we would be demolished. It is we who will demolish Hamas." Among Israel's top targets is Hamas commander Yahya Sinwar, who is being held responsible for carrying out the unprecedented October 7 attack that left at least 1,400 people dead in Israel, including at least 29 Americans. "He is the mastermind behind this, like bin Laden was. He built his career on murdering Palestinians when he understood they were collaborators. That's how he became known as the butcher of Khan Younis [in southern Gaza]," IDF spokesman Lt Col Richard Hecht said Sunday. "That man and his whole team are in our sights. We will get to that man," Posted by Anders Hagstrom Share

House GOP members introduce bill to block Palestinian refugees from entering US Republicans in the House of Representatives will soon introduce legislation that would block the U.S. from accepting refugees from Gaza displaced by Israel's war against Hamas. Reps. Tom Tiffany, R-Wis., and Andy Ogles, R-Tenn., will introduce the Guaranteeing Aggressors Zero Admission Act, or the GAZA Act, which aims to prevent the Biden administration from granting visas to holders of Palestinian passports, according to a report from the New York Post Saturday. "We can’t let President Biden abuse our parole and visa rules to bring unvetted Palestinians into American communities the way he did with thousands of unvetted Afghans," Tiffany said of the legislation in a post on X, formerly known as Twitter. The bill would also prohibit the Department of Homeland Security from allowing Palestinians into the country through its parole program.According to the report, experts believe that there could be more than a million Palestinian refugees from Israel's bombardment of Gaza. The move comes a day after Florida Gov. Ron DeSantis stated that the U.S. should not accept any Palestinian refugees. He argued that while not all Gazans are members of Hamas, they are "all anti-Semtic." "None of them believe in Israel’s right to exist," he added. Fox News' Michael Lee contributed to this report. Posted by Anders Hagstrom Share

Gaza resident says Hamas confiscated car keys, ID to prevent evacuation amid Israeli warnings A Gaza resident described Hamas terrorst confiscating car keys and IDs in order to prevent Gazans from heeding Israeli warnings to evacuate toward the South, according to a phone call recording released by Israeli forces. The Israeli Defence Force revealed the recording Sunday, saying it was a conversation between a Gaza resident and an Israeli intelligence officer. "In the conversation, the resident tells the officer that Hamas confiscated people's personal belongings including their car keys and IDs to prevent them from heading south for safety as they were instructed by the IDF," Israel wrote in a statement. "This is further evidence that the Hamas terrorist organization is actively preventing Palestinians from evacuating south in order to protect themselves," it added. Israeli forces had urged civilians in Gaza to flee the northern region as the IDF prepares for a ground invasion against Hamas. Israel had previously shown Hamas roadblocks, which it said prevented civilians from leaving. Hamas has long used innocents as human shields, and frequently places its weapon caches and command centers in or around places like hospitals, schools and mosques. Posted by Anders Hagstrom Share

DeSantis doubles down against US taking Gaza refugees, urges 2024 candidates to state their position Florida Gov. Ron DeSantis doubled down on his demand that the U.S. not accept any refugees from Gaza amid Israel's war against Hamas on Sunday. DeSantis said on CBS' "Face the Nation" that every 2024 presidential candidate should weigh in on whether Gazan refugees should be welcomed in the U.S. He went on to say that Israel has every right to use whatever pressure it can to secure the release of hostages in Gaza and retaliate against Hamas terrorists, including shutting off water and electricity. The popular Florida governor first laid out his stance against accepting Gazans on Saturday, highlighting that none of the Arab states in the Middle East were willing to accept refugees either. "If you look at how they behave, not all of them are Hamas, but they’re all anti-Semitic, none of them believe in Israel’s right to exist, none of the Arab states are willing to take any of them," DeSantis said. "The Arab states should be taking them if you have refugees, you don’t fly people and import them into the United States of America." "My view is very simple: If you don't like this country, if you hate America, you should not come to this country, we’ve got to start being smart about this," he added. Posted by Anders Hagstrom Share

Ben Sasse vows to 'protect Jewish students' as pro-Hamas student groups clamor for attention Florida University President Ben Sasse vowed to protect Jewish students and protect free speech as pro-Palestinian sentiment continues to show its face at U.S. universties. Sasse, a former U.S. Senator for Nebraska, says his university has the largest population of Jewish students of any university in the country. Student groups held a vigil commemorating the at least 1,300 people killed in Israel during Hamas' unprecedented October 7 attack. At other college campuses, however, pro-Palestinian student groups have shouted slogans praising Hamas and the slaughter of Jews. Sasse challenged wuniversities to "do some educating" and read the Hamas charter, which explicitly calls for the extermination of the Jewish people. Sasse went on to say that many U.S. students expressing support for Palestinians are likely unaware of tyhe violence called for in the Hamas charter and are merely "confused" by their own ignorance. Posted by Anders Hagstrom Share

Kirby: US 'actively trying' to find hostages in Gaza, 'won't rule anything out' regarding US effort White House National Security Council spokesman John Kirby says the U.S. is "actively trying" to locate American hostages who may being held in Gaza on Sunday. Kirby made the statement during an appearance on Fox News Sunday, telling host Shannon Bream that President Biden's administration had not ruled out any means of rescuing American hostages. Bream pressed Kirby on whether the U.S. would consider deploying American elite troops to conduct rescue operations in Gaza. Kirby asserted that there are no plans to deploy U.S. boots on the ground, and he declined to elaborate on efforts to rescue Americans. "This is obviously high on the president's priority list. Nothing is more important to him than the safety and security of Americans that are held hostage overseas," Kirby said. Posted by Anders Hagstrom Share

Sen. Cotton: 'Anything that happens in Gaza is the responsibility of Hamas' Anything that occurrs in Gaza now and during the expected Israeli invasion is the fault of Hamas, Sen. Tom Cotton, R-Ark., says. Cotton made the statement during an appearence on Fox News Sunday, telling host Shannon Bream that Israel cannot be blamed for retaliating against Hamas' October 7 attack. He highlighted that Hamas has refused to allow Gazans to evacuate toward the south, as the Israeli Defense Forces have urged. "Hamas is dedicated to the destruction of Israel as a nation and the extermination of the Jewish people. That's in their charter," Cotton said. "If you don't want your hostpitals, your schools and your mosques bombed, then you shouldn't be using them as human shields." Cotton went on to say that the U.S. should not rule out deploying "elite warriors" to rescue American hostages potentially being held in Gaza. So far, 29 Americans were confirmed to have been killed in the Hamas attack, and 14 remain missing. Posted by Anders Hagstrom Share

US senators 'rushed' to shelter in Tel Aviv as Hamas rockets rain down on Israel Senate Majority Leader Chuck Schumer and a bipartisan group of other Senators took shelter from Hamas rocket fire in Gaza on Sunday during a visit to Israel. Schumer was in Tel Aviv along with Sen. Mitt Romney, R-Utah; Sen. Bill Cassidy, R-La; Sen. Jacky Rosen, D-Nev., and Sen. Mark Kelly, D-Ariz. He said the group was rushed to a shelter as Israeli rocket warnings blared Sunday morning. "While in Tel Aviv today, our delegation was rushed to a shelter to wait out rockets sent by Hamas. It shows you what Israelis have to go through. We must provide Israel with the support required to defend itself," he wrote. Schumer's group announced their trip to Israel on Friday. They are there to show solidarity with Israel in the wake over Hamas' unprecedented October 7 attack, which left at least 1,300 people in Israel dead, including at least 29 Americans. Posted by Anders Hagstrom Share

Nikki Haley blasts Biden for delivering Iran $6 billion as nation threatens to intervene in Israel Former South Carolina Gov. Nikki Haley blasted President Biden's decision to unfreeze $6 billion in Iranian funds as part of a prisoner exchange deal Sunday. Haley argued the funds have granted Iran far too much power, and the country is now threatening to intervene in Israel's war against Hamas. Haley made the comments during a Sunday morning appearance on CNN's State of the Union with host Jake Tapper. Haley, a Republican 2024 presidential hopeful, has criticized Biden's foreign policy decisions throughout his time in office. Posted by Anders Hagstrom Share

Breaking News Fmr IDF special operator suggests delay in ground invasion due to new hostage intel Former Israeli special operator Aaron Cohen says the delay of Israel's ground invasion may be due to new intelligence regarding the state of hostages taken by Hamas in Gaza. Cohen appeared on Fox News on Sunday to offer analysis of the situation. Israel had previously said it delayed its invasion plans this weekend due to poor weather that threatened to obstruct the air force's ability to support ground troops, though Cohen suggested that may not be the full story. "What we need is what Israel does best. They come together, they're creative. They've got the intestinal fortitude. They've got the experience, and right now thousands of phone calls are being listened to. You're about to see Israel [do] what it does best: rescue good people. So stand by," Cohen said. Cohen went on to say that buying time to save hostages is a top priority for Israeli forces, and a phony delay of the invasion may have offered extra time. Posted by Anders Hagstrom Share

Biden says 'overwhelming majority' of Palestinians had 'nothing to do' with Hamas attack President Biden highlighted the distinction between Palestinian citizens and their Hamas leaders on Sunday, saying most Palestinians had "nothing to do" with the October 7 attack on Israel. "We must not lose sight of the fact that the overwhelming majority of Palestinians had nothing to do with Hamas’s appalling attacks, and are suffering as a result of them," he wrote. The statement comes as an Israeli ground invasion of Northern Gaza appears imminent. The U.S. has supplies support to Israel via delivering weapons and ammunition, but no U.S. troops will participate in the operation. Secretary of State Tony Blinken will reportedly arrive in Israel for a second trip in as many weeks on Monday. Posted by Anders Hagstrom Share

Sec. Blinken to return to Israel Monday as Gaza invasion is imminent Secretary of State Tony Blinken will return to Israel on Monday, just days after leaving the country last week. He will meet with Israeli officials to coordinate U.S. support for the country as it carries out its invasion of Northern Gaza, Reuters reported. The U.S. has not deployed troops and is not directly assisting the Israeli operation, instead only delivering supplies. The U.S. has deployed two air craft carrier strike groups to the Eastern Mediterranean as tensions in the region rise. The U.S. has warned Iran and other regional powers not to get involved in the conflict. Blinken met with Qatari officials late last week and defended Israel's operation. Qatar is also playing host to the leaders of Hamas. Posted by Anders Hagstrom Share

Breaking News Hamas still firing rockets out of Gaza despite Israeli bombardment as invasion looms Hamas terrorists were still able to fire rockets out of their hiding places in Gaza despite a week of Israeli bombardment as of Sunday. Fox News foreign correspondent Trey Yingst says rockets continued to fly out of Northern Gaza toward Israeli targets throughout the weekend. Israel's military is planning a full ground invasion of Gaza using its power on the land, air and sea in the coming days. Israel had planned to carry out the invasion this weekend, but was delayed due to poor weather conditions that hampered the air force's ability to support ground troops. Yingst added that many people are concerned Israel's invasion of Gaza could just be the "beginning" of a wider escalation of conflict in the Middle East. "Look at the amount of American military assets headed this direction. The evacuation of U.S. citizens by sea. Iranian FM meeting with the leader of Hamas. Attacks from Hezbollah. Uncertain days," he wrote on X, the platform formerly known as Twitter. Posted by Anders Hagstrom Share

Nearly 1,500 Muslim imams endorse 'fatwa' against Hamas following Israel attack The Global Imam Council, which represents 1,470 Muslim Imams around the world condemned Hamas' terrorist attack on Israel and endorsed a "fatwa" against the terror organization. The GIC, based in Najaf, Iraq, condemned Hamas' October 7 attack last week, declaring that it stands "with the Jewish people in their struggle against ISIS-like Islamist terrorism carried out by Hamas." "The Global Imams Council (GIC), our members, and the 800+ communities led by our Imams worldwide, abide by the Fatwa issued against Hamas by The Islamic Fatwa Council on 9 March, 2023, charging Hamas with corruption and crimes against humanity; forbidding Muslims from supporting, donating to, joining or praying for the terrorist organization. The GIC is proud to have proposed the Fatwa against Hamas to The Islamic Fatwa Council, and contributed to its Resolution Document that outlines the Islamic legal charges against Hamas," the group wrote in a statement. The GIC went on to condemn the "extremist and violent rhetoric" used by pro-Palestinian and pro-Hamas protesters in the U.S. and Europe. Tens of thousands of pro-Palestinian protesters took to the streets in the U.K. and Australia this weekend, with many shouting slogans in favor of killing Jewish people. Posted by Anders Hagstrom Share

Florida lawmaker announces successful evacuation of 96 Americans out of Israel Rep. Cory Mills, R-Fla., says his office has successfuly evacuated 96 Americans out of Israel since the war on Hamas broke out last week. Mills says his team has chartered a plane that can carry 218 people out of the country, and that it remains standing by to carry more Americans out of Israel. "Our office and team ha now gotten out 96 Americans from Israel. 77 of which I was on myself," Mills wrote. "We’ve also secured a charter aircraft that can hold 218 passengers. It will not cost anything the Americans needing to get out of Israel." Mills added that his team had also successfully evacuated the son of Rep. Bill Huizenga, R-Fla. President Biden's administration has faced criticism for a lack of effort to assist Americans seeking to leave Israel, which is now a nation at war. Posted by Anders Hagstrom Share

Israel halts artillery fire along Gaza evacuation route, urges civilians to flee The Israeli military urged Gazan civilians to flee southward along a specified evacuation route on Sunday, clearing out a 3-hour window in which the IDF would not fire on the route. The IDF alerted Gazans of the window via social media and air-dropped flyers this weekend. Israeli forces are currently preparing for an all-out assault on Northern Gaza, planning to infiltrate from land, air and sea. "Residents of Gaza City and northern Gaza, in the past days, we've urged you to relocate to the southern area for your safety. We want to inform you that the IDF will not carry out any operations along this route from 10 AM to 1 PM. During this window, please take the opportunity to move southward from northern Gaza," the IDF wrote. "Your safety and that of your families matters. Please follow our instructions and head southward. Be assured, Hamas leaders have already ensured their safety and that of their families," it added. Posted by Anders Hagstrom Share

Iran warns Israel it will intervene if Gaza war continues: Report Iran told Israeli officials that it does not want to escalate the ongoing conflict with Hamas and warned that it will intervene if Israel's campaign on Gaza continues. Iran reportedly sent the message through the United Nations on Saturday, though it did not offer details on what an Iranian intervention would look like, according to Axios Both the Hamaz and Hezbollah terror groups, largely funded by Iran, are already engaged in attacks on Israel. Meanwhile, the U.S. and its allies have aggresively warned Iran to stay out of the conflict. The U.S. has deployed two aircraft carrier groups, the USS Ford and the USS Eisenhower, to the Eastern Mediterranean, a clear message of support for Israel and a warning to regional powers. President Biden has emphasized that Israel has not requested U.S. support so far in the campaign, and has instead said that it would not tolerate foreign troops on its soil. Posted by Anders Hagstrom Share

Breaking News Israel prepares for ground invasion of Gaza from land, air and sea The Israeli military is preparing to launch a ground invasion of Gaza from the land, sea and air Sunday morning as reports say weather has delayed plans. The Israeli Defense Forces had initially planned to begin its invasion of Gaza earlier this weekend, but rain, wind and cloud coverage threatened to obstruct Israeli air power from supporting its ground troops. The IDF has offered no formal updates on its invasion plans, but it has warned residents of Northern Gaza to move South. It laid out a route for Gazans to follow that it said would be spared artillery fire between 10 a.m. and 1 p.m. local time. Posted by Anders Hagstrom Share

University of Wisconsin refuses to condemn pro-Hamas demonstrators chanting 'Glory to the murders!' A group of University of Wisconsin students participated in a demonstration on campus endorsing Hamas terrorists' attack against Israel, and the university declined to condemn the chants heard at the event. The students were observed holding Palestinian flags in front of the university's library as one woman was heard shouting into a microphone, "Glory to the murders!" and "We will liberate the land — by any means necessary!" The university described the chants celebrating Hamas' largest attack on Israel in decades as "respectful dialogue" that it allows on and off campus. "The university is not able to restrict First Amendment protected speech, nor does a speaker, rally, or protest on campus constitute the university’s endorsement of the message," a spokesperson for the school said in a statement to the New York Post. The spokesperson also purported that the demonstrators were chanting, "Glory to the martyrs." But the spokesperson did not dispute the chant that said, "We will liberate the land — by any means necessary!" The school declined to comment when pressed by the Post on whether the use of the term "martyrs" was appropriate since the Hamas terrorists killed, kidnapped and raped Israeli civilians. Posted by Landon Mion Share

U.S. to help Americans evacuate Israel if they have valid passport The U.S. Embassy in Israel announced plans to support Americans' effort to depart Israel amid the ongoing war stemming from Hamas terrorists' attack on the Middle Eastern country. The embassy said the U.S. government is helping U.S. nationals and their immediate family members leave Haifa, Israel, for the country of Cyprus through sea travel on Monday. Boarding begins at 8 a.m. local time and U.S. citizens must arrive at Haifa port passenger terminal no later than 9 a.m. local time. Boarding will proceed in order of arrival and has limited space, the embassy said. "Travel within Israel is conducted at your own risk, and plans may change depending on the security situation," the embassy wrote. "The U.S. government is unable to guarantee your safety." The passage to Limassol Port is expected to take about 10 to 12 hours and food and wi-fi will be provided. Travelers will be responsible for making accommodations at their destination and booking further travel. The U.S. Embassy will provide buses to airports from the port of Limassol in Cyprus. Americans will also have to sign a promissory note agreeing to repay the U.S. government. The embassy gave the following instructions for American travelers: • Each traveler must be a U.S. national or the immediate family member (spouse/partner, children under age 21) of a U.S. national and have a valid passport. • If you do not currently have your valid U.S. passport in your possession, please contact us so that we may assist you in making an appointment in Jerusalem or Tel Aviv to obtain one. • Immediate family members who are not U.S. citizens must be eligible for entry to the destination. • Each traveler may bring one bag up to 50 lbs./22 kg plus one small carry-on bag. • Travelers cannot bring pets. • Before boarding the ship, you will be asked to sign a promissory note agreeing to repay the U.S. government for the cost. • You will be responsible for arranging your own accommodations and onward travel from Cyprus. • If you are unable to secure onward travel from Cyprus, chartered flights are also being arranged. Posted by Landon Mion Share

Rubio urges Biden to cancel visas for foreign nationals who support Hamas' attack on Israel Florida Sen. Marco Rubio, a Republican, is asking President Biden to rescind visas for foreign nationals who defend or support Hamas amid the terror group's largest attack on Israel in decades. "America is the most generous nation on earth, but we cannot allow foreign nationals who support terrorist groups like Hamas and march in our streets calling for 'intifada' to enter or stay in our country," Rubio wrote in a press release. Following the attack on October 7, many Americans began participating in demonstrations supporting Hamas terrorists' attack on Israel, with several of these demonstrations happening at U.S. colleges and universities. Rubio's release says some people responsible for organizing and participating in the demonstrations across the U.S. supporting Hamas are in the country on visas. "The Biden Administration has the authority and an obligation under existing law to immediately identify, cancel the visas of, and remove foreign nationals already here in America who have demonstrated support terrorist groups, and in many cases, even celebrated the slaughter of Israeli babies and the rape of Jewish girls," the Republican senator said. "In addition to demanding the Biden Administration apply our existing laws, I will introduce legislation to force them to act," Rubio added. Posted by Landon Mion Share

IDF says Hamas blocking evacuation of civilians from Gaza Israel's Defense Forces said Sunday that Hamas terrorists are blocking civilians who wish to leave from evacuating Gaza. IDF Lt. Col. Jonathan Conricus said early Sunday morning in a livestream on X, the platform formerly known as Twitter, that Hamas is blocking the evacuation of civilians. Conricus said Hamas ordered residents in Gaza to ignore Israel's notice from Friday to evacuate the area as the IDF prepares for a potential ground attack. Civilians who still attempted to leave were stopped by Hamas. "Through the night, rockets were fired at Tel Aviv and southern Israel," Conricus said, adding that fighting is happening in and around the northern part of the Gaza Strip as the IDF continues to attack "different military targets belonging to Hamas." More than 3,600 people have been killed in the war since Hamas launched its attack last week, leading to retaliatory action from Israeli forces. Thousands more have been wounded, and many others have been taken hostage by Hamas and raped, tortured and murdered. Posted by Landon Mion Share

Rep. Andy Biggs says US should not accept refugees from Gaza, focus on US-Mexico border instead Rep. Andy Biggs, R-Ariz., argued that the U.S. should not accept refugees from Gaza amid violence in Israel resulting from Hamas terrorists' largest attack on the country in decades. "We should NOT take in 1 million refugees from Gaza—a region prone to terrorism and anti-semitism," Biggs wrote on X, the platform formerly known as Twitter. "Where is the focus on our own southern border?" the congressman asked. Posted by Landon Mion Share

Tlaib loses it when asked in 2019 if Israel has right to exist: 'You work for Netanyahu?!' A video purportedly from 2019 shows Rep. Rashida Tlaib, the progressive Democrat of Michigan, saying that Israel and the Palestinian people should "coexist" after being asked if the former has a right to exist. In the video obtained by Fox News Digital , the Michigan representative is seen having a spirited conversation with a self-described "concerned Jewish constituent." "Separate but equal doesn't work, it didn't work with Blacks and Whites in our country, it shouldn't work in Israel," Tlaib says at the beginning of the clip. "Right?" The person who took the video, who asked not to be publicly identified, pressed the Squad member, asking, "So would that be a right for Israel to exist?" "Do they pay you guys?" Tlaib responded. "Do you work for Netanyahu?" The questioner informs the representative that she is an American citizen, pressing Tlaib for an answer. "Would you like to answer the question?" Tlaib is asked. "Congresswoman, it's really concerning for me that you can't just say that you believe Israel should exist." Fox News' Sarah Rumpf-Whitten and Jon Street contributed to this report. Posted by Landon Mion Share

DeSantis says US shouldn’t take in refugees from Gaza: ‘I am not going to do that’ Florida Gov. Ron DeSantis says the U.S. should not be receiving any refugees from Gaza in light of the Hamas terror attack against Israel, after at least one left-wing Democrat suggested it. "I will say, and I don’t know what Biden’s going to do, but we cannot accept people from Gaza into this country as refugees," DeSantis, who is running for the Republican 2024 presidential nomination, said on Saturday. "I am not going to do that." DeSantis was speaking a week after the Hamas terror attack against Israel that killed over 1,300 Israelis. Israel has since launched a counterattack against Hamas in Gaza, sparking a significant displacement of the population. The United Nations has said that more than 423,000 Gaza citizens have been displaced. The U.S., under the Biden administration, has expanded refugee resettlement from a cap of 18,000 during the Trump administration to 125,000 now — although it did not come close to reaching that cap last year. Of the FY 2024 allocation, 30,000-45,000 is allocated for refugees from the Near East and South Asia. The humanitarian situation has led to some concerns from Republicans that refugees from Gaza could end up in the United States. Rep. Jamaal Bowman, D-NY, told the New York Post the U.S. should be open to accepting refugees from the area. "Fifty percent of the population in Gaza are children. The international community as well as the United States should be prepared to welcome refugees from Palestine while being very careful to vet and not allow members of Hamas," he told the outlet. An administration official told Fox News Digital this week that the U.S. "supports safe passage for civilians" and provides support to Palestinian refugees through support to the U.N, including the U.N. Relief and Works Agency (UNRWA) while also engaging in a "worldwide refugee resettlement program" in partnership with the U.N. But DeSantis cited anti-Israeli views from the area as a reason they shouldn’t be allowed into the U.S. "If you look at how they behave, not all of them are Hamas, but they’re all anti-Semitic, none of them believe in Israel’s right to exist, none of the Arab states are willing to take any of them," he said. "The Arab states should be taking them if you have refugees, you don’t fly people and import them into the United States of America." He also noted the pro-Palestinian and anti-Israel protests that have taken place in the U.S., as well as in other Western countries. "My view is very simple: If you don't like this country, if you hate America, you should not come to this country, we’ve got to start being smart about this." Fox News' Adam Shaw contributed to this report. Posted by Adam Sabes Share

North American couple tells 'America Reports' they're stuck in Israel, unable to return to US As the war in Israel continues, Americans have attempted to make arrangements to get back to the United States but have had little success. Roman and Alexis Thomson are both hoping to find a way back home. "It's been incredibly stressful these past couple of days. Basically, we have to change our plan every hour or two. And a lot of variables, things are changing, new news comes in. So, we're just doing our best to try and get home, but it's been very difficult," Roman said during an interview Thursday on "America Reports." The couple spoke of the complicated process for making travel arrangements from Jerusalem. The pair hasn’t been able to get on a flight due to numerous factors, including cancelations and funding. "We initially had a flight booked that was canceled. And so we tried to get on El Al, which is the only flight that's flying out. … Their nearest flight was over a week away, about a week and a half away that we could book on. So, we've been looking into other options," said Roman Thompson a Lawful Permanent Resident of the U.S. Thompson, who is Canadian, is hoping to get back by the end of this month when he has his U.S. citizenship interview. "Someone put us in touch with an organization called Project Dynamo, and their plan was to charter a flight for 300 Americans to leave the country. And they're now having some funding issues to getting the flight funded so that we can all fly out. So, we're kind of just taking it hour by hour." Alexis went on to highlight how the couple has navigated the difficult time. "This is a struggle for us, even as Americans because we hold two identities. This is us as people that really care that our brothers and sisters are being murdered, and we have the luxury to leave, but the American government isn't necessarily responding. And we have to find other means or pay a lot of money to find a flight that aren't even available to fly out at this point." Co-host of "America Reports" Bill Hemmer asked about the possibility of the two leaving Israel by boat, an option that both expressed is a possibility but less than ideal. "It's looking like we might have to do something like that. The word is that the U.S. government is going to be flying the American citizens out, but the first flight is going to be during Shabbat, so we won't be able to fly on that," Roman said. Fox News' Ashlyn Messier contributed to this update. Posted by Adam Sabes Share

Former IDF combat reservist says 'evil beast' Hamas 'must be defanged' A former Israel Defense Forces combat reservist says that Hamas must be severely damaged after it carried out a terror attack at a music festival, killing hundreds of people. Benjamin Anthony, who previously was a combat reservist in the IDF and served during the Second Lebanon War, Operation Pillar of Defense, and Operation Protective Edge, told Fox News Digital that Hamas' capabilities must be limited. "Hamas's ideology is a genocidal ideology. It calls within the charter of Hamas for the destruction and murder of Jews wherever they may be. It calls for the complete destruction of the state of Israel, though it doesn't name Israel specifically, rather all of the land that they define as Palestine, that sort of ideology," Anthony said. "I don't know that it can be destroyed, but I do know that it must be defanged." "And I have faith in the capabilities of the Israel Defense Forces now that we have been brought to full height and full readiness to defang this evil beast that is Hamas," he added. Anthony, who's also the co-founder and CEO of the MirYam Institute, said that he has never seen anything similar to the Hamas terrorist attack. "During my time in the Israel Defense Forces, I never saw anything that like the horrors that we've all borne witness to that took place inside the state of Israel emanating from the Gaza Strip at the hands of Hamas terrorists," Anthony said. "This past Saturday morning, not only have I never seen anything like it, but quite frankly, I don't think anybody's seen anything like this since the horrific events of the horrors of the Holocaust and now the evil that is Hamas has come and must know it is on full view for the world to see it on full view, for the world to recognize. And it is on full view for the states of his own, the people of Israel, to counter and hopefully to destroy." Posted by Adam Sabes Share

Secretary of State Blinken speaks with Chinese foreign minister regarding Israel-Hamas war Secretary of State Antony Blinken spoke with PRC Director of the Office of the Foreign Affairs Commission and Foreign Minister Wang Yi on Saturday. According to a readout of the call, Blinken "reiterated U.S. support for Israel’s right to defend itself and called for an immediate cessation of Hamas’ attacks and the release of all hostages." "The Secretary also discussed the importance of maintaining stability in the region and discouraging other parties from entering the conflict," the readout also states. According to the State Department, the two also "noted the importance of maintaining open channels of communication and responsibly managing the U.S.-China relationship." Posted by Adam Sabes Share

USS Eisenhower carrier strike group to join USS Ford group in Mediterranean as show of force The USS Eisenhower carrier strike group will join the USS Ford carrier strike group in the eastern Mediterranean in a show of force, a senior U.S. defense official confirmed to Fox News on Saturday. Defense Secretary Lloyd Austin made the decision on Saturday, according to the official. The development comes as Israeli forces are preparing to conduct a ground invasion of the Gaza Strip. "I have directed the USS Dwight D. Eisenhower Carrier Strike Group (CSG) to begin moving to the Eastern Mediterranean. As part of our effort to deter hostile actions against Israel or any efforts toward widening this war following Hamas's attack on Israel, the Strike Group includes the guided-missile cruiser USS Philippine Sea (CG 58), guided-missile destroyers USS Gravely (DDG 107) and USS Mason (DDG 87), and Carrier Air Wing 3, with nine aircraft squadrons, and embarked headquarters staffs," Austin said in a statement. "The Eisenhower CSG will join the USS Gerald R. Ford Carrier Strike Group, which arrived earlier this week. The Ford CSG includes the USS Normandy, USS Thomas Hudner, USS Ramage, USS Carney, and USS Roosevelt. Earlier in the week, the U.S. Air Force announced deployment to the region of squadrons of F-15, F-16 and A-10 fighter aircraft." "The increases to U.S. force Posture signal the United States' ironclad commitment to Israel's security and our resolve to deter any state or non-state actor seeking to escalate this war," he added. Fox News' Liz Fried contributed to this report. Posted by Adam Sabes Share

President Biden speaks with Palestinian Authority President Mahmoud Abbas President Biden had a phone call with Palestinian Authority President Mahmoud Abbas on Saturday as Israeli forces are getting ready to conduct a ground invasion of the Gaza Strip. A readout of the call states that Biden condemned Hamas' attack on Israel and "reiterated that Hamas does not stand for the Palestinian people’s right to dignity and self-determination." "President Abbas briefed President Biden on his engagement in the region and his efforts to bring urgently needed humanitarian assistance to Palestinian people, particularly in Gaza," the readout states. During the call, Biden offered Abbas "his full support" for humanitarian assistance to Palestinians in Gaza. Biden also discussed U.S. efforts to prevent the conflict from spreading. "Finally, President Biden detailed U.S. efforts to coordinate with partners to prevent the conflict from widening, and the two leaders discussed the need to preserve stability in the West Bank and the broader region," the readout states. Fox News' Sarah Tobianski contributed to this update. Posted by Adam Sabes Share

Pro-Palestinian protesters march in Washington, D.C. Pro-Palestinian protesters marched in Washington, D.C. on Saturday afternoon as Israeli forces are preparing a ground invasion of the Gaza Strip. Thousands of people showed up to the protest, which marched through the streets of Washington, D.C. "To stand with Palestine is to stand with humanity," one poster reads. 1,300 Israeli civilians and soldiers have died during the war with Hamas, as well as 29 Americans. 15 American citizens are also unaccounted for. Palestinian health authorities say at least 2,215 Palestinians have died. Fox News' Jon Raasch contributed to this update. Posted by Adam Sabes Share

Casualties, kidnapped and more numbers since Hamas' attack on Israel Since the surprise attack on Israel by Hamas terrorists on Oct. 7, hundreds of civilians, including babies, the elderly, and soldiers have been killed, wounded or captured. Israel retaliated against Hamas by firing missiles into Gaza. A terror attack by Hamas at a music festival in Israel claimed the lives of at least 260 concert-goers with many others kidnapped and injured. Those abducted — including American citizens — are still being held hostage in Gaza. "We now know that American citizens are among those being held by Hamas," President Biden said in a press conference Tuesday afternoon. Below are the most recent numbers related to the war. Fox News Digital will continue to inform on fatalities, hostages, death toll and more as they are reported and confirmed by officials. 29 Americans are reported dead At least 1,300 Israeli civilians and soldiers have been killed At least 3,000 Israelis have been injured At least 8,700 Palestinians have been wounded At least 2,215 Palestinians and Hamas terrorists have been killed At least 150 soldiers and civilians are being held hostage in Gaza At least 5,000 rockets have been fired by Hamas terrorists At least 1,500 Hamas terrorists have been found dead At least 260 died at the Tribe of Nova music festival At least 70 terrorists invaded Kfar Aza At least 200 Israelis were found dead in Kfar Aza At least 30 missing persons have been located and rescued at a kibbutz The population of Gaza is 2,000,000 The population of Israel is 9,795,000 8 days of war as of Saturday, October 14 Fox News' Ashlyn Messier contributed to this update. Posted by Adam Sabes Share

Breaking News U.S. State Department confirms 29 American citizens killed in Israel, 15 unaccounted for The State Department confirmed on Saturday afternoon that 29 American citizens have been killed in Israel during the country's war with Hamas. 15 American citizens are also unaccounted for, including one lawful permanent resident. "At this time, we can confirm the deaths of 29 U.S. citizens. We extend our deepest condolences to the victims and to the families of all those affected. We are not commenting further on the circumstances of the U.S. citizen deaths or the identities of the deceased at this time," a State Department spokesperson said. "At this time, we are also aware of 15 U.S. citizens who are unaccounted-for, as well as one lawful permanent resident. State Department personnel have been in contact with their families. The U.S. government is working around the clock to determine their whereabouts and is working with the Israeli government on every aspect of the hostage crisis, including sharing intelligence and deploying experts from across the United States government to advise the Israeli government on hostage recovery efforts. For privacy and security reasons, we have nothing further to share," the spokesperson added. Posted by Adam Sabes Share

President Biden speaks with Israeli Prime Minister Netanyahu President Biden spoke with Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu on Saturday, according to the prime minister's office. According to the prime minister's office, Netanyahu thanked Biden for his "unwavering support." "The 2 leaders discussed the situation focusing on the south. PM thanked the president for the security and intelligence aid," a readout states. The phone call comes as the Israeli Defence Forces are preparing a ground invasion of the Gaza Strip. Fox News' Sarah Tobianski contributed to this update. Posted by Adam Sabes Share

Netanyahu meets Israeli soldiers on front lines: ‘We are all ready’ for 'next stage' Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu is meeting with Israeli soldiers on the front lines ahead of expected ground invasions. The prime minister posted a video of himself speaking with Israeli Defense Forcemembers, alluding to coming combat. "With our fighters in the Gaza Strip, on the front line. We are all ready," Netanyahu wrote on social media. In a video shared in the post, Netanyahu asks troops, "Are you ready for the next stage?" "The next stage is coming," he says, without stating what the next stage of Israel's conflict with Hamas is. Israel has called up some 360,000 troops and amassed forces on the border with Gaza ahead of an anticipated ground assault to annihilate Hamas' capabilities. The terror group launched a surprise attack on Israel on October 7, rampaging through communities in southern Israel and killing as many as 1,300 Israelis in the worst attack in the country's history. Fox News' Timothy H.J. Nerozzi contributed to this update. Posted by Adam Sabes Share

New York City mayor says 'we are not all right' after Hamas massacred Israelis New York City Mayor Eric Adams delivered heartfelt remarks showing strong support for the city's Jewish community and Israel after the deadly terror attacks on October 7, the Jewish holiday of Simchat Torah. Speaking at a "New York Stands with Israel" rally on Tuesday, Adams said, "We are not all right" after the world witnessed the atrocities committed by Hamas in southern Israel, where terrorists committed murder, rape, torture and kidnappings and boastfully posted their crimes on social media. "We are not all right when we see young girls pulled from their home and dragged through the streets," Adams said to a crowd of thousands who had gathered to express solidarity with Israel. "We are not all right when we see grandmothers being pulled away from their homes, and children shot in front of their families. We are not all right when right here in the City of New York you have those who celebrate at the same time when the devastation is taking place in our city," he continued. "We are not all right when Hamas believes that they are fighting on behalf of something and their destructive, despicable action that carried out. We are not all right when we still have hostages who have not come home to their family. We are not all right, and we're not going to say we have a stiff upper lip and act like everything is fine. Everything is not fine. Israel has a right to defend itself, and that's the right that we know." Adams remarks came after Israel declared war on Hamas in a conflict that has now claimed more than 3,200 Israeli and Palestinian lives, including at least 27 Americans. Adams, President Biden and other world leaders have acknowledged Israel's right to self-defense, but the civilian casualties from Israel's retaliatory strikes — made worse because Hamas terrorists hide behind human shields — have stoked anti-Israel sentiment and antisemitism at home and abroad. Fox News' Chris Pandolfo contributed to this update. Posted by Adam Sabes Share

Turkish president's son Bilal Erdogan joins pro-Palestinian march in Istanbul The son of Turkish President Recep Tayyip Erdogan attended a large pro-Palestinian march in Istanbul on Saturday. Bilal Erdogan was accompanied by former Interior Minister Suleyman Soylu and former speaker of Turkish parliament Mustafa Sentop, the Associated Press reported. “Let us make clear our side, we should at least let our feelings be heard,” Erdogan told The Associated Press. The crowd of over 1,000 people carried Palestinian and Turkish flags while chanting slogans criticizing Israel and the United States. In comments to the AP, Sentop said, "Everyone with a conscience, regardless of race or religion, are displaying their sentiments toward this genocide.” Hamas called for Friday to be a "Day of Rage" and prompted massive protests all across the Muslim world against Israel's response to the Gaza attacks. Widespread demonstrations involving tens of thousands of people were reported in Turkey, Iran, Iraq, Syria, Egypt, Jordan, and other Middle East nations as well as European countries. The Associated Press contributed to this update. Posted by Chris Pandolfo Share

Breaking News Israel Defense Forces preparing for 'significant ground operations' The Israeli military said on Saturday its forces were preparing a "wide range of operational offensive plans" to attack Hamas in Gaza. The military offensive will include "combined and coordinated strikes from the air, sea and land," Israel Defense Forces said. "IDF battalions and soldiers are deployed across the country and are increasing operational readiness for the next stages of the war, with an emphasis on significant ground operations," the military said. Israel has called up some 360,000 troops and amassed forces on the border with Gaza ahead of an anticipated ground assault to annihilate Hamas' capabilities. The terror group launched a surprise attack on Israel on October 7, rampaging through communities in southern Israel and killing as many as 1,300 Israelis in the worst attack in the country's history. Israel had given the entire 1.1 million population of the northern half of the Gaza Strip, which includes the enclave's biggest settlement, Gaza City, until Saturday morning to move south. Fox News' Timothy H.J. Nerozzi contributed to this update. That deadline expired at 9:00 a.m. ET on Saturday. Posted by Chris Pandolfo Share

Fox News senior field producer shares firsthand account of Hamas horrors Fox News senior field producer Yonat Friling shared her firsthand account of the "horrors" she has encountered covering the brutal Hamas terror attack on Israel. "The most disturbing thing I have seen, since the Hamas attacks of October 7, is too horrible to describe and share here," Friling wrote in an op-ed for Fox News Digital. "In the past week, I have seen the most awful things that can be done to people of all ages—babies, older women, young teens -- scenes that I will never forget." Friling said that she, like many others in Israel, has lost friends and colleagues to the campaign of terror waged on Israelis by Hamas. "There are 70,000 living near the Israel-Gaza border area, and in less than 24 hours, more than 1,000 of them have been slaughtered. Families seeking shelters on a sunny Saturday morning were killed; in some places, they barricaded themselves for 10 to 16 hours with no electricity or water, with only the clothes they had. They heard the Hamas militants' footsteps and their conversations in their homes. Each story we hear is more unfathomable than the other, more disturbing," Friling wrote. "The scene in Israel since the Hamas attacks is grim. Most of the towns and communities are empty. The streets are silent, shops are closed, and there are no people are walking around. There is a heavy army and police presence, and the smoke from the rockets and the airstrikes fills the air. "In the communities that were closest to the border, the houses of Israelis living there have been torched, and there's no resemblance to the vibrant lifestyle that was there just a few days ago. "I have covered many wars and conflicts here in Israel, but this is the hardest one I have encountered so far; I am at a loss for words to describe what I feel, and frankly, I haven't had the time to do so." Posted by Chris Pandolfo Share

'What pure evil looks like’: American recounts horrifying capture of relatives by Hamas An American whose family members are believed to have been killed or taken hostage by Hamas recounted their horrifying experience and encouraged others to share pictures and videos of the brutal attacks. "There is no nuance in this situation. This is evil," LeElle Slifer told Fox News Digital. Israel declared war on Hamas after the terror group launched a wide-scale attack on the Jewish state last weekend. Hamas has killed more than 1,300 Israeli civilians, and Israel's retaliatory strikes have killed more than 1,500 Palestinians, officials from both parties said Friday. Hamas is believed to have taken up to 150 hostages. Slifer said she spotted her mother’s cousin, Kinneret, in a video of hostages with Hamas terrorists. Two days later, she said she saw another video which she believes shows Kinneret’s lifeless body. Kinneret’s body has still not been found. "I am so thankful that we live in an age where we can quickly disseminate the truth because there is no arguing with pictures and videos," she added. "And unless people look at these things and see what pure evil looks like, we’ll never be able to stop it." Fox News' Kassy Dillon contributed to this update. Posted by Teny Sahakian Share

Mayor Adams rips celebrities who 'spew out hateful thinking' and antisemitism in synagogue message New York City Mayor Eric Adams took aim at celebrities who "spew out" antisemitism during a speech at the city's largest synagogue. "Far too many sports figures and entertainers are using these new terminologies of credible messengers and influencers to spew out hateful thinking in general, but specifically antisemitism," Adams said during his speech at the Temple Emanu-El Shabbat services Friday. Adams comments come as Israel continues to fight back against a surprise attack launched on the country by Hamas last weekend, dragging the country into a conflict that has already claimed thousands of lives. But the battle in Israel has also highlighted the continued battle against antisemitism at home. Hamas called for Friday to be a "Day of Rage" and capped off a week of protests nationwide against Israel's response to the Gaza attacks. One New York City rally last week promoted by the local Democratic Socialists of America (DSA) chapter included pro-Hamas demonstrators ridiculing Israel supporters with images of a swastika. Fox News' Michael Lee contributed to this update. Posted by Chris Pandolfo Share

Pets left without families after Hamas attacked communities Fox News foreign correspondent Trey Yingst reported on the devastation left by Hamas' brutal attack on communities in southern Israel , including pets whose families were butchered. A group of Israeli civilians on Saturday rescued a puppy from a small village near the Gaza border that was hit by Hamas terrorists. They told Yingst that the family who owned the puppy was killed during the attack on Saturday morning. The dog, which appeared frightened by loud noises in the area, was "another indication of people who were just living their lives, they were with their families and their pets, and these militants went into their homes and killed so many people," Yingst said. Yingst reported that Israel has established a volunteer service to find and rescue animals abandoned in war torn communities. As many as 1,300 Israeli civilians were slaughtered when Hamas terrorists infiltrated the country on Oct. 7, entering into people's homes and raping, torturing and slaughtering those they found there. Posted by Chris Pandolfo Share

Hamas terror attack on Israel is 'gift' for Putin's Ukraine push, expert says The terrorist attack in Israel is a "gift" for Russia, who will find America’s attention now divided and its resources potentially shifted away from Ukraine, in what could prove a critical point in the conflict, an expert told Fox News Digital. "This couldn’t have happened at a better time for Putin and at the worst time for Israel," Rebekah Koffler, president of Doctrine & Strategy Consulting and a former Defense Intelligence Agency officer, told Fox News Digital. "Putin will seize the momentum to escalate his war on Ukraine," she added. "Israelis will pay with their blood for Biden’s incompetent foreign policy in Eurasia and his appeasement of Iran." Hamas terrorists launched thousands of missiles at Israel and invaded towns along the Gaza border on Saturday, killing at least over 1,300 people, including 27 Americans, and wounding thousands more, prompting Israel to declare war against the Iran-backed group. Many countries immediately and clearly condemned the attack, including Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi, who expressed how "deeply shocked" he was by the news, as did leaders of European nations, including Germany and France. Posted by Peter Aitken Share

Iran's supreme leader says Hamas attack on Israel and ongoing war shows 'power of Islam' Iranian Supreme Leader Ayatollah Ali Khamenei said Saturday the recent surprise attack on Israel by Palestinian terrorists will lead to victory for all Palestinians over Israel, state media reported. In comments reported by IRNA news, Khamenei said, "all [countries] in the Muslim world have a duty to support Palestine." “Today, one of the representations of the power of Islam is the developments that are taking place in Palestine,” Khamenei said during a meeting with Nigeria Shia cleric Sheikh Ebrahim Zakzaki. Earlier on Tuesday Khamenei, who has final say on all state matters, rejected allegations about his country’s role in Hamas' attacks against Israel and vowed to continue supporting the Palestinian territories. Iran is a known backer of Hamas and praised the attacks on Israel. The State Department has stated in the past that Iran provides some $100 million a year to Palestinian armed groups, including Hamas and Islamic Jihad. Biden administration officials have said there is no "specific evidence" that Iran helped Hamas plan and execute the attack on Israel, but acknowledged "broad complicity by the Iranians" in supporting terror throughout the region. Posted by Chris Pandolfo Share

Breaking News Netanyahu visits Israeli troops on the front line in the Gaza Strip Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu posted photos Saturday of his recent visit with troops on the front line in the Gaza Strip. "With our fighters in the Gaza Strip, on the front line," Netanyahu posted on X. "We are all ready." In a video shared in the post, Netanyahu asks troops, "Are you ready for the next stage?" "The next stage is coming," he says, without stating what the next stage of Israel's conflict with Hamas is. Israel has called up some 360,000 troops and amassed forces on the border with Gaza ahead of an anticipated ground assault to annihilate Hamas' capabilities. The terror group launched a surprise attack on Israel on Oct. 7, rampaging through communities in southern Israel and killing as many as 1,300 Israelis in the worst attack in the country's history. Israel had given the entire 1.1 million population of the northern half of the Gaza Strip, which includes the enclave's biggest settlement Gaza City, until Saturday morning to move south. As that deadline approached it said it would guarantee the safety of Palestinians fleeing on two main roads until 4:00 pm local time. That deadline expired with no immediate announcement from either side of any change in the situation. Posted by Chris Pandolfo Share

Breaking News Hezbollah claims responsibility for attacks on Israeli outposts in disputed territory The Lebanese terror group Hezbollah on Saturday claimed responsibility for fire directed at five Israeli outposts in disputed territory on the border between Israel and Lebanon. The Iran-backed group said in a statement the attack took place in the disputed Shebaa farms area with guided missiles and mortar shells. Reuters reported heavy shelling of Israeli outposts in the area as well as the sound of gunfire. The Israel Defense Forces says it is returning fire at the source of the launches from Lebanon. Israel and Hezbollah fighters have traded fire several times in the past week since Palestinian terrorists with Hamas launched an attack on Israel on Oct. 7. Both terror groups have received backing from Iran. Hezbollah deputy chief Naim Qassem said on Friday that the group would not be swayed by calls by President Biden and others for it to stay on the sidelines of the ongoing conflict between Israel and Hamas, saying the group was "fully ready" to contribute to the fighting. "The behind-the-scenes calls with us by great powers, Arab countries, envoys of the United Nations, directly and indirectly telling us not to interfere will have no effect," he told supporters gathered in the southern Beirut suburb for a rally. "Hezbollah knows its duties perfectly well. We are prepared and ready, fully ready," Qassem said. Reuters contributed to this update. Posted by Chris Pandolfo Share

Iran foreign minister warns Israel to stop strikes on Gaza: 'It might be too late in a few hours' Iran's foreign minister Hossein Amirabdollahian on Saturday urged Israel to call off its attacks on Gaza, warning that the terror group Hezbollah could join the war, attacking Israel from the north. After meeting with Hezbollah leader Sayyed Hasan Nasrallah, Amirabdollahian told reporters in Beirut that the Lebanese terrorist group is monitoring the ongoing war in Gaza and is prepared to join the conflict. “I know about the scenario