Sanna Marin, the former Finnish prime minister, has announced she will work as an adviser for the Tony Blair Institute after stepping down as head of her party.

Marin, who became one of Europe’s youngest leaders when she took office as prime minister in 2019 and oversaw Finland’s successful application to join Nato, formally stepped down as head of the Social Democrats earlier this month. She plans to resign as an MP.

“Time to move on,” she told the Finnish broadcaster Yle as she announced her departure from Finnish politics. “I am eager to step into a new role. I also believe that it can benefit the whole of Finland. I believe that I can serve those voters [in Finland] well and maybe even better in the new assignment.”

The job will include advising countries, governments and leaders on policy issues such as good governance, technology, climate and gender equality, she said.

Tony Blair, announcing Marin’s employment at his nonprofit, where she will work as a strategic counsellor, praised her as “bold and practical”.

“Our mission is to help political leaders worldwide deliver change for their people – and Sanna Marin knows exactly how to do that,” the former British prime minister said. “Ms Marin is bold and practical, understands the role that technology can play as the enabler of a more efficient and citizen-centred state, and will lend her experience to our mission in more countries throughout the world.”

In the role she will work with colleagues and teams across the organisation’s portfolio, the institute said. It praised her “record of accomplishment” across climate targets, digitalisation, and Finland’s Nato accession, which it hailed as “the swiftest accession in the alliance’s history”.

“Ms Marin shares TBI’s progressive values; she is a reform-oriented and pragmatic leader with a continued commitment to public impact. She understands the role that technology can play in improving the delivery of public services, making them more relevant, accessible and efficient for more people.”

Marin’s career change comes after her party lost April’s general election to Finland’s main conservative party in a tight three-way race, with right-wing populists coming second and the Social Democrats third.

As prime minister she led a coalition government, including her own Social Democrats, the centrist Centre party, the Green League, the Left Alliance and the Swedish People’s party.

skip past newsletter promotion Sign up to This is Europe Free weekly newsletter The most pressing stories and debates for Europeans – from identity to economics to the environment Enter your email address Sign up Privacy Notice: Newsletters may contain info about charities, online ads, and content funded by outside parties. For more information see our Newsletters may contain info about charities, online ads, and content funded by outside parties. For more information see our Privacy Policy . We use Google reCaptcha to protect our website and the Google Privacy Policy and Terms of Service apply. after newsletter promotion

But her private life and active social media use as prime minister came under heavy scrutiny – prompting international headlines.

In August 2022 she apologised after a photo was published showing two women kissing and posing topless at the prime minister’s official summer residence. Pictures of her dancing and singing with friends also prompted a debate about a the right of a prime minister in office to party – leading to accusations of double standards, sexism and ageism.