22 Jun 2023 15.03 BST Sunak claims Labour policy would make the economic situation worse. They would borrow huge amounts of money. But increasing borrowing would “make the situation worse”, he says. He says Labour has ruled out more oil exploration in the UK. He says that would be a mistake. It would be “absurd” not to use the supplies available in the UK. Cutting off our own supplies of energy would be a “shortsighted policy”, he says. And on pay, he says he also thinks Labour’s policy is wrong. Labour would borrow money to give people high pay awards. But that would just drive inflation up, and that would result in the pay rises they were getting being swallowed up, he says. Share

22 Jun 2023 14.59 BST Sunak says 'standards matter' – but again refuses to say if he agrees with privilege committee findings about Boris Johnson Q: You have talked about trust. Do you agree with the privileges committee report into Boris Johnson? Sunak says he has enormous respect for the privileges committee’s, supports it, and respects the vote in the Commons. But he does not want to focus on the past. He is focused on the future, he says. He did not vote because he was at a charity dinner, he says. But he resigned as chancellor from Johnson’s government. He did that because he disagreed with his approach. That shows he is willing to act in accordance with values and standards. “I think standards matter,” he says. "I wasn't there to vote because I was at a charity dinner as you know," Rishi Sunak says



The PM explains his absence from the Partygate vote, and stresses he believes "standards matter" - citing his decision to quit as Boris Johnson's chancellorhttps://t.co/ESoGbXntqj pic.twitter.com/KKSQwk7DCa — BBC Politics (@BBCPolitics) June 22, 2023 Share Updated at 16.11 BST

22 Jun 2023 14.58 BST Sunak says inflation partly higher than forecast because economy did not got into recession as expected Sunak is now taking media questions. He does not sound keen. Q: [From ITV’s Robert Peston] Is recession a price worth paying to get inflation down? Sunak says people expected the economy go to into recession this year. That did not happen. That is partly why the inflation challenge is harder, he says. He says halving inflation is the right priority. Share Updated at 16.11 BST

22 Jun 2023 14.52 BST Q: How will you reform the apprenticeship levy? Sunak says the government is letting big companies use their apprenticeship levy money on companies in their supply chains, if they are not using the money themselves. He says this is an idea that came out of conversations with businesses. Share

22 Jun 2023 14.48 BST Q: What are the core values that inform your leadership style? The questioner says he is with people on an Ikea leadership programme. Sunak asks the Ikea staff on the programme what their values are. Three of them answer. Rishi Sunak asks the IKEA workers what they believe the most important leadership values are.



They tell him they include "leading by example... treating people how you expect to be treated yourself [and] being very open and honest." pic.twitter.com/A9MvlHzY3D — Adam Bienkov (@AdamBienkov) June 22, 2023 Sunak says integrity is important for political leadership. He says people should be able to trust politicians. That is why he is honest with people. He says he wants to be straight with people about problems, not “sugar-coating” things. He says it also means delivering. He is not going to promise the earth. He has set out his priorities. He will be held account, in six months, a year, 18 months. Share Updated at 16.12 BST

22 Jun 2023 14.43 BST Q: How do we ensure that public procurement now benefits British firms? Sunak says the government can do that now because it has left the EU. It can value things like whether firms are employing apprentices when contracts are awarded. He says this will help small and medium-sized businesses in particular. Large firms are already well placed to win contracts. Share

22 Jun 2023 14.42 BST Sunak is now taking questions from workers at the Ikea plant where he is speaking. Q: What are you going to do about the NHS? My family members are waiting longer and longer to see a doctor. Sunak says cutting waiting lists is one of his five priorities. That is because of Covid, he says. During the pandemic, people who could not get treatment are coming back. That is why backlogs are so big. He says he is holding meetings on this almost every week. That means “more doctors, more nurses, more ambulances, and then being a bit clever about how we do things”. He says ambulance times are improving. At Christmas people were waiting an hour and a half for a serious call. Now that is down to halve an hour. Share

22 Jun 2023 14.38 BST Sunak says he is getting government borrowing under control. That means taking difficult decisions. For example, he cannot cut taxes now, he says, even though he would like to. He runs through the policies he is pursuing. And he ends his speech saying he wants to be honest with people about the challenges ahead. UPDATE: Sunak said: We are on it and we are going to get through it. Now that’s not easy, as I said, and anyone tells you that it’s easy or can happen overnight, they’re not being straight with you. I want to be honest with you, these things are tough. They require difficult decisions, but that’s what you should get from your government. That’s what you should get from your prime minister, and that’s what I’m going to do. Share Updated at 16.13 BST

22 Jun 2023 14.34 BST Sunak says he made tackling inflation one of his top priorities. Tackling it won’t be easy, he says. It will require “difficult decisions”. Why did I set it as my top priority? It’s pretty simple. It’s because inflation eats into the pounds in your pocket. It’s as simple as that. It makes us everybody poorer, makes prices go up. It means your savings get eroded. It puts jobs and livelihoods at risk. And that’s why it’s so important that we target it and get it down. Share