2 Oct 2023 15.13 BST Tom Tugendhat challenges Tories in favour of ECHR withdrawal to explain practicalities Several members of the cabinet have been saying they support the government not ruling out withdrawal from the European convention on human rights. Ministers in favour of the ECHR have been less vocal, but on Times Radio Tom Tugendhat, the security minister, challenged those on the other side of the argument to explain how they would deal with the practicalities. He said: My position is really very simple. Which is there are many treaties around the world, if you want to leave one, please explain to me how you’re going to address the gaps that they create. Now, people who’ve said they want to leave the convention, I can understand the argument. It does raise some pretty big questions, whether that’s about the Good Friday agreement, whether it’s about the devolved administrations, whether it’s about our relationships with other countries, including, in fact, the TCA [trade and cooperation agreement – the Brexit deal with the EU]. Asked if he was saying withdrawal would be a mistake, Tugendhat said: I’m just suggesting these are really big questions and don’t throw around words unless you can answer the questions. And so what we need to do is make sure if you’re looking at the future in a different way, that’s fine. Set out the questions. Set out the answers. View image in fullscreen Tom Tugendhat at the Tory conference. Photograph: Oli Scarff/AFP/Getty Images Share Updated at 16.28 BST

2 Oct 2023 14.54 BST How Hunt wants to reduce civil service numbers by around 60,000 This is what Jeremy Hunt said in his speech about freezing civil service recruitment. We have the best civil servants in the world – and they saved many lives in the pandemic by working night and day. But even after that pandemic is over, we still have 66,000 more civil servants than before. New policies should not always mean new people. So today I’m freezing the expansion of the civil service and putting in place a plan to reduce its numbers to pre-pandemic levels. This will save £1bn next year. And I won’t lift the freeze until we have a proper plan not just for the civil service but for all public sector productivity improvements. Treasury sources have been suggesting that Hunt would be happy to see diversity and equality posts axed as part of this crackdown. But in practice that is not going to make much difference. There were 457,000 people in the civil service in June this year. The headcount was projected to grow by 40,000 next year, but Hunt is now freezing numbers at where they are now. Around 1,000 civil servants work on diversity and equality issues, the Treasury says. When Hunt says he wants to get numbers down to pre-pandemic levels, that means getting the headcount down by around 60,000, to around 400,000, the Treasury is saying. In his speech Hunt implied that it was Covid that pushed up civil servant numbers. But in fact Brexit is mainly responsible. The Treasury says new officials had to be hired to deal with the process and to perform government functions that were previously done in Brussels when the UK was in the EU. Share Updated at 15.04 BST

2 Oct 2023 14.47 BST No 10 says final decision on phase two of HS2 not yet taken Downing Street is now saying that Rishi Sunak has not taken the final decision on phase two of HS2, Sky’s Beth Rigby reports. On HS2 from No 10 spokesperson: “These reports are incorrect. No final decisions have been taken on Phase 2 of HS2” On HS2 from No 10 spokesperson: “These reports are incorrect. No final decisions have been taken on Phase 2 of HS2” — Beth Rigby (@BethRigby) October 2, 2023 Share

2 Oct 2023 14.26 BST Hunt claims the Tories are the only party prepared to take difficult decisions. Rishi Sunak shows what can be achieved with education, aspiration and hard work, he says. He ends: It’s time to roll up our sleeves, take on the declinists and watch the British economy prove the doubters wrong. And that’s the end of the speech. It was remarkably short, and light. In the past a chancellor’s speech at party conference was a major political event. That was more of a footnote. Share

2 Oct 2023 14.21 BST Hunt is now talking about the plans to restrict welfare payments. He says he supports Mel Stride in his review of work capability assessments. And to ensure work continues to pay, the government will increase the national living wage to at least £11 per hour, he says. (See 8.12am.) Share Updated at 14.25 BST

2 Oct 2023 14.18 BST Hunt says he will freeze expansion of civil service But one aspect of the review has already been decided, it seems. Hunt says he is going to freeze the expansion of the civil service until numbers are down to pre-pandemic levels. That should save £1bn, he says. Share

2 Oct 2023 14.16 BST Hunt says the Institute for Fiscal Studies was wrong to say last week that higher taxes are permanent. (See 9.33am.) The UK needs a more productive state, not a bigger state, he says. He says the UK can stabilise government spending as a proportion of GDP if it increases public sector productivity by 0.5% every year. John Glen, the chief secretary to the Treasury, will review how this can be done, he says. Share Updated at 14.30 BST

2 Oct 2023 14.14 BST Hunt claims higher borrowing under Labour will lead to higher taxes and higher inflation Hunt says Labour will increase borrowing, and that will increase debt. That means higher taxes, higher mortgages and higher inflation for families. That’s not an economic policy. It’s an economic illusion. Share