When JD Davis, the department chair of English at a high school in Twin Falls, Idaho, was told last year that half of the committee he was leading to pick new texts and materials for the district’s English language arts classrooms would be parents and community members, he objected.

“I said, ‘I’m not going to have parents involved! They don’t know what we’re doing. They don’t know what we need in a textbook,” recalled Davis, who also teaches journalism, leads the school newspaper and advises the Gay-Straight Alliance.

A new Idaho law gave him no choice.

Across the US, educators typically lead textbook selections, although many districts, like Twin Falls, have long included parents in the process. Idaho’s District Curricular Adoption Committees law makes parent involvement mandatory – and then some – demanding districts form committees of at least 50% non-educators, including parents of current students, to review and recommend new texts and materials.

A year in, the law is reshaping what is or isn’t in the curriculum in many counties in this western state, including whether subjects like climate change or social movements are discussed in some courses.

It has spurred tough but positive parent-school discussions in Twin Falls, where parents and educators say the conversations have forced them to consider one another’s concerns and perspectives. In other districts, however, it’s poised to harden divisions and keep students from getting learning tools they need.

Around the US, curriculums – books and materials that guide but don’t define lessons – have become a political target of conservatives who say they conflict with values they want to instill in their children. Over the past two years, 147 so-called “parental rights” bills were introduced in state legislatures, according to a legal tracker by the education thinktank FutureEd.

Parents give us their children for several hours a day and a lot of trust, and we want to make sure to earn and keep that trust LT Erickson of the Twin Falls school district

Only a handful passed. Many restrict discussions around race and gender. Several enforce parents’ ability to review texts and materials. A 2022 Georgia Parents’ Bill of Rights requires that schools provide parents access to classroom and assigned materials within three days of a request. The Idaho curriculum law, embraced by the state’s conservative legislature – which also passed one of the most restrictive abortion bans in the country – went into effect in July 2022.

The curriculum law is noteworthy because it gives parents and community members more power not just to inspect curriculum, but to help choose it.

Some educators in the state view the law as a political move to undercut their professional role. “The parent partnership is important,” said Peggy Hoy, an instructional coach in the Twin Falls district and the Idaho director for the National Education Association, the nation’s largest union representing educators, including public school teachers and staff. “The problem is when you make a rule like they did and there is this requirement, it feels as an educator that the underlying reason is to drive a wedge between the classroom and parents.”

Sally Toone, a recently retired state representative and veteran teacher who opposes the law, sees it as a legislative move by conservatives “to have parents be a driver, instead of a partner, in the educational process”.

View image in fullscreen Sally Toone, a 37-year teacher, voted against the Idaho curriculum review law, which she said was a move by conservatives ‘to have parents be a driver, instead of a partner, in the educational process’. Photograph: Laura Pappano/The Hechinger Report

Educators also voiced practical considerations. It can be tough for districts to find parents to devote time to curriculum review. Many have had to scramble, Hoy and others said. Only three non-educators agreed to serve on a math curriculum committee in Twin Falls, which meant that only three educators could participate – fewer than half the optimal number, said the educator who led the committee.

Having many non-educators involved also changes how materials are judged. Educators want to know, for example, if lessons are clear and organized, and whether they connect to prior learning and support students of differing levels. By contrast, “parents don’t understand the pedagogy of what happens in a curriculum”, said Hoy. They “look at the stories, the word problems, the way they are explaining it”.

Judy Boyle, a Republican state legislator who sponsored the law, initially agreed to an interview but did not respond to several requests to arrange it.

Which curriculum is appropriate?

During the review process in Twin Falls, a district with 9,300 students in southern Idaho, parents objected to a theme around peaceful protests, the tone of questions about the climate crisis and lessons that included social-emotional learning.

The curriculum with social-emotional learning “got nixed pretty quickly”, said Davis, the English teacher leading the committee. Social-emotional learning (SEL) – tools and strategies that research shows can help students better grasp academic content – has become a new lightning rod for the far right across the US and is conflated with critical race theory (CRT).

Chris Reid, a banker and vice-mayor of Twin Falls and a father with seven children in the public schools, said he was eager to help select the new English language arts curriculum and make sure materials were “age-appropriate” and not include “revisionist history”, LGBTQ+ themes or sexuality introduced “to younger-age children”.

“My family and I are very religious,” said Reid, sitting in his mezzanine office at First Federal Bank one recent afternoon. “My biggest concern as a father was: what are my children going to be reading?”

View image in fullscreen Chris Reid, a father of seven, served on the committee to select a new English language arts curriculum for the Twin Falls school district. Photograph: Laura Pappano/The Hechinger Report

Despite some tense conversations, Davis, the teacher, said the process was overall “not threatening”. He also liked the curriculum choice, the myPerspectives textbooks by Savvas Learning Company. He does, however, see risks with the new mandate, including that a parent or community member with an agenda “could hamstring the district from getting the best textbook”, he said. “It could literally be one member of the committee.”

Committee member Anna Rill, a teacher at Canyon Ridge high school, said the difficult conversations about content “made us think a little more about the community you are living in and that you are serving”.

Twin Falls, named for the waterfalls formed by the Snake River canyon dam, is politically conservative (70% voted for Donald Trump in 2020). LT Erickson, director of secondary programs for the school district, said he thought the curriculum “should meet the values and ideals of your community”. He added: “Parents give us their children for several hours a day and a lot of trust, and we want to make sure to earn and keep that trust.”

Reid, the father of seven, liked being able to share his views and values. “I got to hear other perspectives; they got to understand my side on the content,” he said. The experience led him to conclude that “teachers are not evil. They are not trying to indoctrinate my child.”

skip past newsletter promotion Sign up to First Thing Free daily newsletter Our US morning briefing breaks down the key stories of the day, telling you what’s happening and why it matters Enter your email address Sign up Privacy Notice: Newsletters may contain info about charities, online ads, and content funded by outside parties. For more information see our Newsletters may contain info about charities, online ads, and content funded by outside parties. For more information see our Privacy Policy . We use Google reCaptcha to protect our website and the Google Privacy Policy and Terms of Service apply. after newsletter promotion

‘We had no spelling lists, no word work’

The new law may have helped to build bridges in Twin Falls and some other communities. But in the West Bonner county school district, which serves about 1,000 students in rural north Idaho, a year-old dispute over an English language arts curriculum continues to fuel division.

The blow-up began last summer. In June, before the new law went into effect, the curriculum review committee, which included a few parents, chose the Wonders English language arts curriculum from publisher McGraw-Hill. The school board approved it quickly and unanimously; the materials were purchased and delivered.

Then some local conservative activists objected, saying the materials contained components of social-emotional learning. In developing the curriculum, McGraw-Hill had partnered with Sesame Workshop to include SEL skills that included “a focus on self-confidence, problem-solving, and pro-social behavior”, according to the publisher’s website. At a meeting on 24 August 2022, the school board voted 3-1 to rescind the curriculum.

Because the existing curriculum is out of print, the district lacked a reading program last year.

“We had no spelling lists, no word work. The first unit was on the desert and we live in north Idaho,” said Whitney Urmann, who taught fourth grade last year at West Bonner county school district’s Priest Lake elementary school. “Very early on, I stopped using the curriculum.” She had two workbooks for her entire class and few books leveled to her students’ abilities. Other materials were incomplete or irrelevant, she said. From mid-October on, she said, she bought materials herself, spending $2,000 of her $47,000 salary to be able to teach reading.

View image in fullscreen Teacher Whitney Urmann said that by October she had exhausted all available materials in the reading curriculum at the Priest Lake elementary school. Photograph: Laura Pappano

The board’s decision, said Margaret Hall, the board member who cast the dissenting vote, “has created some ill feelings”. Indeed: two board members who voted to rescind the curriculum now face a recall after parents gathered enough signatures on petitions to force a vote.

Shouting at one school board meeting in June went on for nearly four hours.

The dispute, and the subsequent absence of teaching materials, has upset some local parents. Whitney Hutchins, who grew up in the district and works at the Priest Lake resort her family has owned and operated for generations, recently decided with her husband to move across the state line to Spokane, Washington.

“This is not the environment I want to raise my child in,” said Hutchins, mother of an 18-month-old. She said the curriculum law is part of a larger problem of extremists gaining control and destroying civic institutions.

[The] people choosing the curriculum ... [are] going to be people with a political agenda who don’t believe in public education Whitney Hutchins

“It is scary to me that 50% of people choosing the curriculum are not going to be teachers,” she said. “It is scary to me that it is going to be people with a political agenda who don’t believe in public education.”

Hutchins doesn’t see things improving. The school board, on a 3-2 vote, chose Branden Durst – who was previously a senior analyst at the far-right Idaho Freedom Foundation and has no educational experience – as the district’s new superintendent.

Durst said that he wanted the job because of the district’s challenges, including around curriculum. “I have a lot of ideas that are frankly unorthodox in education. I needed to prove to myself that those things are right,” he said. Those ideas could include using a curriculum developed by the conservative Christian Hillsdale College, he said.

Durst is currently assembling a new committee with plans to quickly adopt a new English language arts curriculum, but declined to share details.

Jessica Rogers, who served on the committee that picked the Wonders curriculum, said she saw hints of trouble long before the vote to reject the curriculum. She said the committee that selected the Wonders curriculum had anticipated political attacks, including over images that showed racial diversity. “One of the things we did was go through the curriculum and see where the first blond-haired, blue-eyed boy was,” she recalled, adding that they noted pages to use as a defense.

It was, she said, “bizarre”.

Rogers and her husband recently built a home atop a hill with a broad view of Chase Lake. As her three daughters had a water fight on the patio, she hoped aloud that building in the West Bonner county school district was not a mistake.

This story about curriculum reviews was produced by the Hechinger Report, a nonprofit, independent news organization focused on inequality and innovation in education. Sign up for the Hechinger newsletter.