Blanket exemptions allowing religious schools to discriminate against staff and students on the basis of sexuality and gender identity should be repealed, a key report to the federal government has recommended.

The long-awaited report from the Australian Law Reform Commission, released on Thursday, says the institutions should be allowed to preference staff in line with their beliefs so long as it is proportionate and “reasonably necessary” to maintaining a community of faith and does not breach existing discrimination laws.

The commission said the changes it proposed should be replicated for any future religious discrimination laws, such as those promised by Labor at the last federal election.

The attorney general, Mark Dreyfus, said on Thursday the government would seek to “enhance protections” against discrimination in an effort to bring the country together.

“Just as commonwealth law already prohibits discrimination on the basis of race, gender, sexuality, disability and age, no one should be discriminated against because of their faith,” he said.

“Equally, no students or member of staff should be discriminated against because of who they are. At the same time, religious schools must continue to be able to build and maintain communities of faith.”

On Wednesday, the prime minister, Anthony Albanese, revealed the federal government had drafted two bills in response to the commission’s report which was handed to Dreyfus in December.

One bill would amend the Sex Discrimination Act while the other would introduce protections against religious discrimination. The bills have not been publicly released.

Albanese said he would not move forward with the bills unless there was bipartisan support from the opposition, adding it was a “reasonable ambition”.

“What I’ve said, from the very beginning, including at that roundtable, was that there needed to be bipartisan support for this position,” he told question time on Wednesday.

“If it is going to be passed through the Senate, given the nature, it needs the support of not just the government, but it needs the support of either a Coalition or the Greens political party. That’s just the numerical facts.”

The opposition leader, Peter Dutton, earlier refused to offer any commitment before seeing the proposed legislation, describing Labor’s move on Tuesday as a “setup” to to dump its election commitment.

Dutton added he was not given the full details of the proposed changes. “The prime minister gave me no document. He put no position [forward] and he outlined a couple of elements … But beyond that, nothing,” Dutton said.

It’s understood the opposition has since received formal briefings on the proposals. The Greens offered their help passing the bills for the government, should the opposition refuse their support.

The party’s LGTBQI+ spokesperson, Stephen Bates, said the federal government should work with the minor party and progressive crossbenchers rather than shelve the changes entirely.

“This is too big of an opportunity to pass up and just shove into the too-hard basket,” he told Guardian Australia.

skip past newsletter promotion Sign up to Australian Politics Free daily newsletter From the big, breaking news to quiet, thoughtful analysis, all you need to keep up with Australian political manoeuvres Enter your email address Sign up Privacy Notice: Newsletters may contain info about charities, online ads, and content funded by outside parties. For more information see our Newsletters may contain info about charities, online ads, and content funded by outside parties. For more information see our Privacy Policy . We use Google reCaptcha to protect our website and the Google Privacy Policy and Terms of Service apply. after newsletter promotion

The ALRC’s report recommends the government repeal section 38, which allows religious schools to discriminate against people on the basis of their sex, sexual orientation, gender identity, intersex status, marital or relationship status.

It also recommends parts of section 37 and section 23 be amended to narrow the scope in which religious institutions can discriminate.

The recommendations go further than those proposed changes under the former Morrison government, which offered protections for gay and lesbian students but omitted trans students and LGBTQI+ teachers.

Jacinta Collins, the National Catholic Education Commission’s executive director, said the recommendations would “severely limit” how religious schools operate and teach if adopted by the government.

“It’s disappointing that they overlook the concerns of religious leaders and the high regard parents hold for the ethos and nature of their schools,” Collins said.

Bilal Rauf, a spokesperson for the Australian National Imams Council, said there was a “more pressing need” for religious discrimination protections where none exist.

Rauf said a woman wearing a hijab, for example, could not be discriminated against on the basis of her ethnicity or gender, but could legally face discrimination as a result of her religious identity.

“There’s a more pressing need for a level of protection at a societal level in respect of religious identity, which presently is missing,” he said.

Equality Australia’s legal director, Ghassan Kassisieh, said the proposals should be quickly adopted.

“This is the blueprint for reform and we call on the federal government to adopt the recommendations in full, and pass legislation as soon as possible,” he said.

“Labor committed to these reforms before coming to power but discrimination against LGBTQ+ students and staff is happening in religious schools across the country because of gaps in Australian laws that makes it lawful.”