From 19 Sept 2023 15.18 BST Almost 90% of voters - including 65% of Tories - say Britain needs fresh team of leaders, poll suggests If anyone is still wondering why Emmanuel Macron found time to meet Keir Starmer today, a quick glance at figures in the latest politcal monitor polling report from Ipsos will explain all. Labour has had a huge lead in opinion polls for about a year now, and the voting intention figures from Ipsos, putting Labour on 44%, and the Tories on 24%, suggest the Labour lead is as strong as ever. What is more significant is what the polling says about underlying attitudes. Here are five of the most striking figures. 1) Almost 90% of people think Britain needs a fresh team of leaders, the poll suggests. And that includes two-thirds of people (65%) who voted Conservative in 2019. And the desire for change has increased since May, when just 55% of Tory supporters wanted a fresh team of leaders, and 80% of all voters wanted new leadership (not 86%, which is the figure now). The more people have seen of Sunak, the more they want someone different. Doubtless many of the 65% of Tories who say Britain needs a fresh team of leaders are angling for someone like Kemi Badenoch as PM, not Keir Starmer. But these are still dire figures for Sunak. Percentage of people who think Britain needs fresh team of leaders. Photograph: Ipsos 2) Sunak’s government is viewed as even less competent than Boris Johnson’s. This result may come as a surprise to anyone familiar with the internal dynamics of the Johnson government. Most observers would accept that, in terms of the core prime ministerial skill set (taking decisions, reading the briefings, obeying the law and not making things up), Sunak is a vast improvement on his predecessor. It probably reflects the extent to which Johnson got credit for implementing Brexit after years of paralysis and leading the country through Covid. It is probably also indicative of how Sunak is being blamed for problems that have built up over years. Polling on whether the government is competent. Photograph: Ipsos 3) The Conservative party is more unpopular than Labour on every indicator that counts. Ipsos asked people about 11 qualities that might apply to political parties, and the Tories come out worse on all but one of them – often by a wide margin. (The only exception is being “different”, where the Tories are narrowly ahead. Some people might view being different as a bad thing, but some respondents may consider it a bonus, and so it is hard to be sure how to interpret this result.) Polling on party image. Photograph: Ipsos 4) Sunak is less popular than Starmer, and Sunak’s ratings have been falling over the summer. Party leader ratings. Photograph: Ipsos 5) Sunak is only ahead of Starmer on two of the 11 leadership traits featured in the survey. He had a lead on being good in a crisis, and being a good representative for Britain on the world stage. Given that, unlike Starmer, he does represent the UK on the world stage, and he does have to deal with the crises affecting the country (Starmer is only responsible for crises affecting the Labour party), these findings are perhaps not surprising. On most of the other indicators, Starmer has a good lead. Polling on party leaders. Photograph: Ipsos Share Updated at 15.37 BST

19 Sept 2023 17.20 BST Diane Abbott has posted an open letter on X (Twitter) saying she has concluded that the Labour party internal investigation into her is “fraudulent” and that she will not get a fair hearing. She was suspended from the parliamentary party in April, pending an investigation, after she wrote a letter to the Observer that appeared to downplay the significance of racism experienced by Jewish, Irish and Traveller people because it said that, unlike black people, they were not subject to racism for “all of their lives”. As a Black woman, and someone on the left of the Labour Party, I have unfortunately been forced to reach the conclusion that I will not get a fair hearing from this Labour leadership. pic.twitter.com/jZjVCJxeVW — Diane Abbott MP (@HackneyAbbott) September 19, 2023 Share

19 Sept 2023 16.56 BST Lib Dems say Liz Truss should not get payments from allowance to fund ex-PMs still active in public life The Liberal Democrats have said it is an “outrage” that Liz Truss received £23,310 from a fund available for former prime ministers who still play a role in public life between November last year and March 2023. The figure is disclosed in the Cabinet Office’s annual report and accounts. Most former PMs claim close to the full amount from public duty cost allowance – £115,000 per year – but the report shows that Boris Johnson has not claimed anything from it. Pointing out that Truss also received £18,660 in severance pay when she resigned as PM, Christine Jardine, the Lib Dem spokesperson for the Cabinet Office, said: It’s an outrage that while families struggle to pay their bills and put food on the table, Liz Truss profits from her own failure. If Liz Truss wants to cut tax she should lead by example and stop taking hardworking British taxpayers for a ride by claiming handouts … It is time for Rishi Sunak to do the right thing and stop Liz Truss from claiming taxpayers’ cash from the ex-PM fund. Despite not claiming from the fund, Johnson has not been hard up since leaving office 12 months ago. Before he resigned as an MP, he declared outside earnings of £4.8m. View image in fullscreen Public duty cost allowance figures. Photograph: Cabinet Office Share Updated at 19.09 BST

19 Sept 2023 16.11 BST Scottish government accuses London of 'misuse of executive power' as it opens legal challenge against trans law veto Blocking controversial gender reforms in Scotland because of a “policy disagreement” is “inconsistent with the constitutional principles” of the UK, the lord advocate has argued. As PA Media reports, Dorothy Bain KC used this argument as she started significant constitutional battle between the UK and Scottish governments in the court of session in Edinburgh. PA says: Bain was arguing against Westminster’s use of the section 35 order of the Scotland Act to prevent the gender recognition reform (Scotland) bill gaining royal assent. In her opening remarks, Bain told the hearing, presided over by Judge Lady Haldane, that Scottish ministers believe the order is “unlawful” and want it dropped. The Scottish secretary, Alister Jack, triggered the never-before-used power of the Scotland Act – the legislation which established the Scottish parliament – to halt gender laws which sought to simplify the process for trans people to self-identify and obtain a gender recognition certificate (GRC). Bain told Scotland’s highest court the decision would effectively mean Holyrood was not able to legislate on issues which Westminster disagreed with. She said: “There are those who disagree with the bill or those who would have legislated differently, or not at all. It is apparent from the respondent’s answers that the secretary of state is within that number.” She went on to argue the decision to use the section 35 order did not go through adequate scrutiny in the House of Commons, requiring the court to “occupy dead ground and stepping into the vacuum” to prevent the “misuse of executive power”. Bain said: “It would be inconsistent with the constitutional principle of parliamentary accountability for the UK government to be able to veto Scottish legislation simply on the grounds of a policy disagreement.” The lord advocate said if the secretary of state really had concerns about the contents of the Holyrood legislation, he would have raised it during multiple consultations and scrutiny of the bill in the Scottish parliament. She said: “If the secretary of state had such fundamental concerns, it is striking there was not a whisper of them through the various consultations and the earlier stages of the bill’s parliamentary process. Indeed, the UK government got sight of this bill and the appropriate supporting documents before the bill was introduced to the Scottish government.” However, Lady Haldane interrupted Bain to state that the UK government did not have a requirement to consult with the Scottish government prior to the section 35 order. Later in the session, Bain then went on to address arguments that the Scottish legislation infringed on reserved UK equality laws, arguing the bill only alters the process of obtaining a GRC, not the effect of the certificate. She also said no explanation was given on what the secretary of state meant when he said the legislation would have adverse effects on UK tax IT systems, arguing Jack should explain his rationale, rather than Scottish ministers “to try to work out what he was on about”. The Scottish legislation seeks to change the age at which a person can obtain a GRC from 18 to 16, and removes the requirement of a gender dysphoria diagnosis. The UK government’s argument is expected to be set out by the advocate general on Wednesday afternoon, with the three-day hearing expected to conclude on Thursday. View image in fullscreen The court of session in Edinburgh. Photograph: Jeff J Mitchell/Getty Images Share Updated at 16.19 BST

19 Sept 2023 15.52 BST This is from Alex Wickham at Politico on the Starmer/Macron meeting. NEW with our top France reporter @Newsbaum_ >>



— Macron and Starmer discussed possibility of a second Trump presidency and the overall impact of US elections in Paris meeting today



— also China, economy, energy security, Ukraine



— sidestepped Brexit NEW with our top France reporter @Newsbaum_ >>



— Macron and Starmer discussed possibility of a second Trump presidency and the overall impact of US elections in Paris meeting today



— also China, economy, energy security, Ukraine



— sidestepped Brexithttps://t.co/LpXjFcmSCb — Alex Wickham (@alexwickham) September 19, 2023 Share

19 Sept 2023 15.18 BST Almost 90% of voters - including 65% of Tories - say Britain needs fresh team of leaders, poll suggests If anyone is still wondering why Emmanuel Macron found time to meet Keir Starmer today, a quick glance at figures in the latest politcal monitor polling report from Ipsos will explain all. Labour has had a huge lead in opinion polls for about a year now, and the voting intention figures from Ipsos, putting Labour on 44%, and the Tories on 24%, suggest the Labour lead is as strong as ever. What is more significant is what the polling says about underlying attitudes. Here are five of the most striking figures. 1) Almost 90% of people think Britain needs a fresh team of leaders, the poll suggests. And that includes two-thirds of people (65%) who voted Conservative in 2019. And the desire for change has increased since May, when just 55% of Tory supporters wanted a fresh team of leaders, and 80% of all voters wanted new leadership (not 86%, which is the figure now). The more people have seen of Sunak, the more they want someone different. Doubtless many of the 65% of Tories who say Britain needs a fresh team of leaders are angling for someone like Kemi Badenoch as PM, not Keir Starmer. But these are still dire figures for Sunak. View image in fullscreen Percentage of people who think Britain needs fresh team of leaders. Photograph: Ipsos 2) Sunak’s government is viewed as even less competent than Boris Johnson’s. This result may come as a surprise to anyone familiar with the internal dynamics of the Johnson government. Most observers would accept that, in terms of the core prime ministerial skill set (taking decisions, reading the briefings, obeying the law and not making things up), Sunak is a vast improvement on his predecessor. It probably reflects the extent to which Johnson got credit for implementing Brexit after years of paralysis and leading the country through Covid. It is probably also indicative of how Sunak is being blamed for problems that have built up over years. View image in fullscreen Polling on whether the government is competent. Photograph: Ipsos 3) The Conservative party is more unpopular than Labour on every indicator that counts. Ipsos asked people about 11 qualities that might apply to political parties, and the Tories come out worse on all but one of them – often by a wide margin. (The only exception is being “different”, where the Tories are narrowly ahead. Some people might view being different as a bad thing, but some respondents may consider it a bonus, and so it is hard to be sure how to interpret this result.) View image in fullscreen Polling on party image. Photograph: Ipsos 4) Sunak is less popular than Starmer, and Sunak’s ratings have been falling over the summer. View image in fullscreen Party leader ratings. Photograph: Ipsos 5) Sunak is only ahead of Starmer on two of the 11 leadership traits featured in the survey. He had a lead on being good in a crisis, and being a good representative for Britain on the world stage. Given that, unlike Starmer, he does represent the UK on the world stage, and he does have to deal with the crises affecting the country (Starmer is only responsible for crises affecting the Labour party), these findings are perhaps not surprising. On most of the other indicators, Starmer has a good lead. View image in fullscreen Polling on party leaders. Photograph: Ipsos Share Updated at 15.37 BST

19 Sept 2023 14.18 BST Gove says he is appointing commissioners to run Birmingham council, and announces inquiry into what went wrong Michael Gove, the levelling up secretary, is making a statement to MPs about Birmingham city council. Birmingham is a great city. But for years the city has suffered because the council has failed to grip mismanagement, he says. The one constant has been “a failure to deliver for residents who deserve better”, he says. Gove says, in the light of the council’s decision to issue a section 114 notice, in effect declaring the council bankrupt, he is satisfied that Birmingham council is failing to comply with its best value duty. He is today writing to the council notifiying it of his intention to intervene, and to appoint commissioners to run the council. And he says he is launching an inquiry into what went wrong. Rupert Neate covered the background to this story in his First Edition briefing today. Tuesday briefing: Birmingham’s long road back from the brink of bankruptcy Read more Share Updated at 14.19 BST

19 Sept 2023 13.51 BST Christopher Hope from GB News has more on the Starmer/Macron meeting – including details of the gifts. NEW Great to bump into Sir Keir Starmer just now after his meeting with Emmanuel Macron. The pair spoke for 45 minutes, with no advisers present, in English. Starmer gave Macron an Arsenal shirt with 25 (for 25th President) and “MACRON” on the back; Macron gave Starmer cufflinks. NEW Great to bump into Sir Keir Starmer just now after his meeting with Emmanuel Macron.

The pair spoke for 45 minutes, with no advisers present, in English.

Starmer gave Macron an Arsenal shirt with 25 (for 25th President) and “MACRON” on the back; Macron gave Starmer cufflinks. — Christopher Hope📝 (@christopherhope) September 19, 2023 The conversation was described as “warm” and “constructive”. It was the pair’s first ever sit down chat having met previously on the margins of the Queen’s funeral and the King’s coronation. Brexit was discussed along with other issues, sources said. The conversation was described as “warm” and “constructive”.

It was the pair’s first ever sit down chat having met previously on the margins of the Queen’s funeral and the King’s coronation.

Brexit was discussed along with other issues, sources said. — Christopher Hope📝 (@christopherhope) September 19, 2023 Share

19 Sept 2023 13.47 BST Starmer says meeting with Macron 'very constructive and positive' Keir Starmer has described his talks with the French president as “very constructive and positive”. In an interview with Sky News after the meeting in the Élysée Palace, Starmer did not give details of what was discussed, but he said overall it was positive. He said: We had a very constructive and positive meeting which, as you can imagine, covered a wide range of issues. It was my first opportunity to say how much I value the relationship between our two countries, particularly when it comes to prosperity and security and how, if we are privileged enough to be elected into power, we intend to build on that relationship and make it even stronger than it is today … We had a very political discussion covering a lot of issues to do with global politics but also it was that opportunity to look at future prosperity, future security, some of the most pressing issues on my mind, on the president’s mind. Starmer also said there had been an exchange of gifts. Asked if he thought Macron was hoping for the election of a Labour government, Starmer dodged the question. But he did say it was their first meeting and that it was important they got to know each other. "It was a positive meeting, it was my first opportunity to say how much I value the relationship between our two countries"



Sir Keir Starmer reflects on his meeting with President Macron in Paris this morning



Politics latest: https://t.co/OdENLjE5i3



📺 Sky 501, Virgin 602 pic.twitter.com/aY3UAlgdcP — Sky News (@SkyNews) September 19, 2023 Share Updated at 14.47 BST

19 Sept 2023 13.13 BST Tory West Midlands mayor Andy Street says business case for HS2 won't exist if it isn't built in full Ben Quinn Rishi Sunak is facing fresh pressure to end doubts about the future of HS2 after the Conservative mayor of the West Midlands said that its business case only stacks up if the line is built in full – going all the way from Euston in London to Manchester and with an eastern “spur” in to the east midlands. The intervention by Andy Street comes amid reports that plans were being drawn up by Downing Street and the Treasury to dramatically scale back the project. A spokesperson for Street said: It makes perfect sense for the prime minister and chancellor to keep it under review and regularly look at the best ways to deliver the project for the taxpayer. That is very different to ‘scrapping’ some or all of HS2. Remember, the business case only stacks up if the line is built in full - which is what should happen. Andy fought tooth and nail to win this once-in-a-generation investment for the West Midlands, and he has no intention of reopening the argument. Yesterday a transport minister repeatedly refused to confirm to MPs whether the project would run to Manchester. Originally planned as a Y-shaped route between London and the north, HS2 has been cut back repeatedly amid ballooning costs, with the eastern leg to Leeds scrapped in 2021 and the Manchester leg delayed by another two years in March. The pressure comes in the wake of signs of fresh tensions with the Labour over the project after the shadow Treasury minister Tulip Siddiq told Times Radio that her frontbench colleague Nick Thomas-Symonds “maybe knows something I don’t” after he promised a Labour government would build HS2 in full. The comments on Monday to BBC Radio 4 by Thomas-Symonds, the shadow trade secretary, come after the party’s national campaigns coordinator, Pat McFadden, wanted to look at the cost of the project before making a final decision. While they were singled out by the Tories as amounting to an uncosted £7bn, they were welcomed this morning by the leader of Liverpool city council, Liam Robinson. Share Updated at 13.16 BST

19 Sept 2023 13.04 BST Labour says £8m-a-day cost of housing asylum seekers in hotels shows Tories' 'asylum chaos' The Home Office has revealed that it is now spending around £8m a day housing asylum seekers in hotels. The figure is included in the department’s annual report and accounts for 2022-23. Until recently Suella Braverman, the home secretary, has been quoting around £6m per day as the cost to the taxpayer of hotel accommodation for asylum seekers. The report also says the asylum system as a whole, and the accommodation provided as part of it, is costing more than £3bn a year. Commenting on the figures, Yvette Cooper, the shadow home secretary, said: This report illustrates the staggering costs of the Tories’ asylum chaos, with the taxpayer now spending an astronomical £8m in a day on hotels and the costs still going up and up. That is the price of the Conservatives’ utter failure to get a grip on this issue – now costing over £3bn a year. Shockingly, the cost of hotel accommodation has gone up by a third since Rishi Sunak promised to end hotel use. The Tories have busted the Home Office budget, they’ve broken the asylum system, and the British people are paying the price. Cooper claimed that Labour would save the taxpayer billions of pounds through its plans, which include ending the use of hotels by speeding up the processing of asylum claims. Share Updated at 13.19 BST