From 7 Feb 2024 15.25 GMT Badenoch hits back at Labour in PMQs trans jibe row, accusing Starmer of exploiting Ghey tragedy for political purposes Kemi Badenoch, who combines being business secretary with being minister for women and equality, has put out a statement on X claiming it was “shameful” that Keir Starmer chose to use the murder of Brianna Ghey for “political point-scoring”. She also claimed that she personally had sought to take the heat out of the trans issue, and that it was Labour that was weaponising it. Every murder is a tragedy. None should be trivialised by political point-scoring. As a mother, I can imagine the trauma that Esther Ghey has endured.



It was shameful of Starmer to link his own inability to be clear on the matter of sex and gender directly to her grief. (1/2) — Kemi Badenoch (@KemiBadenoch) February 7, 2024 Every murder is a tragedy. None should be trivialised by political point-scoring. As a mother, I can imagine the trauma that Esther Ghey has endured. It was shameful of Starmer to link his own inability to be clear on the matter of sex and gender directly to her grief. (1/2) As Minister for Women and Equalities I’ve done all I can to ensure we have take the heat out of the debate on LGBT issues while being clear about our beliefs and principles. Keir Starmer’s behaviour today shows Labour are happy to weaponise this issue when it suits them (2/2) Share Updated at 15.25 GMT

7 Feb 2024 17.32 GMT Hunt accepts that Tory/Treasury claim about Labour's insulation plan costing £13bn might not be realistic This morning CCHQ put out a statement from Jeremy Hunt, the chancellor, highlight a Treasury analysis of Labour’s plan to insulate 19m homes in a decade saying this would cost double the £bn a year claimed. “This official costing shows that a key plank of Labour’s policy costs double what they have claimed,” he said. But the £13bn a year price tag attached to the policy by the Treasury and CCHQ has been dismissed by Labour (see 11.53am) and by experts (see 1.44pm), and now even Hunt does not seem quite so willing to defend the figure. When it was put to him by ITV’s Robert Peston in an interview that the £13bn figure was “implausible”, because it made assumptions such as full subsidies for wealthy families, Hunt replied: “Even if it’s not double the £6bn, it is still a very big chunk of a £28bn pound spending spree.” Share

7 Feb 2024 17.15 GMT Tory MP Dehenna Davison says it was 'disappointing' to hear Sunak make joke about trans people The Conservative MP Dehenna Davison has said it was “disappointing” to hear Rishi Sunak make a joke in the Commons today at the expense of trans peope. She posted this on X. Wasn’t in Parliament today thanks to a migraine attack so have just caught up on PMQs. The debate around trans issues often gets inflamed at the fringes. As politicians, it’s our job to take the heat out of such debates and focus on finding sensible ways forward, whilst ensuring those involved are treated with respect. Given some of the terrible incidences of transphobia we have seen lately, this need for respect feels more crucial than ever. That’s why it was disappointing to hear jokes being made at the trans community’s expense. Our words in the House resonate right across our society, and we all need to remember that. Wasn’t in Parliament today thanks to a migraine attack so have just caught up on PMQs.



The debate around trans issues often gets inflamed at the fringes. As politicians, it’s our job to take the heat out of such debates and focus on finding sensible ways forward, whilst ensuring… — Dehenna Davison MP (@DehennaDavison) February 7, 2024 Share

7 Feb 2024 17.06 GMT Hunt claims Sunak's jibe at PMQs was not aimed at trans people Jeremy Hunt has rejected claims that Rishi Sunak was making a joke at the expense of trans people at PMQs. In an interview with the BBC’s Chris Mason, the chancellor said that Sunak was making a point about Keir Starmer repeatedly changing his mind and that the PM stressed his admiration for Esther Ghey, whose daughter Brianna was murdered in an attack partly motivated by transphobia. Hunt said: What [Sunak] was saying is that for the really important issues of the day Labour and Sir Keir Starmer simply cannot make up his mind. He said when it comes to trans issues, economic issues, like £28bn a year, Labour changes its position by the day. His point was that if a political party that wants to govern this country can’t make up its mind on really important issues including how they would run the economy then they risk losing the progress we have made which would take us back to square one. When Mason put it to Hunt that Sunak “used a line about trans people as a political punchline in the presence of a grieving mother”, Hunt replied: Chris, that is not what happened and you know that …What he was saying was that Keir Starmer cannot make up his mind up about the big issues of the day. During PMQs Sunak said: “I think I counted almost 30 [Starmer U-turns] in the last year: pensions, planning, peerages, public sector pay, tuition fees, childcare, second referendums, defining a woman – although in fairness that was only 99% of a U-turn.” This was a reference to an interview Starmer gave last year in which he said 99.9% of women did not have a penis. At the time interviewers from some outlets were routinely asking Labour politicians if a woman could have a penis because often MPs like Starmer found it hard to give an answer acceptable to trans activists that did not attract derision from the right. Tory politicians generally did not get asked the same question because they were happy to say no – even though technically that is the wrong answer because, as Starmer was alluding to, a gender recognition law that has been in force for 20 years does allow people to change gender without the need for surgery. Share

7 Feb 2024 15.35 GMT Keir Starmer pays tribute to Esther Ghey after they meet in Commons Keir Starmer has posted this on X about his meeting with Esther Ghey. He makes a point of calling Brianna her daughter. Today I met Esther Ghey, whose daughter Brianna was murdered last year. I am utterly in awe of her strength and bravery in the face of such unimaginable grief, as she campaigns to make sure no parent has to go through what she did. Labour will work with campaigners and parents like Esther to ensure our children and young people have the mental health support they need. It’s what Brianna and her family deserve. Today I met Esther Ghey, whose daughter Brianna was murdered last year.



I am utterly in awe of her strength and bravery in the face of such unimaginable grief, as she campaigns to make sure no parent has to go through what she did.



Labour will work with campaigners and parents… pic.twitter.com/hR1lIQu7oC — Keir Starmer (@Keir_Starmer) February 7, 2024 Share

7 Feb 2024 15.30 GMT Nicola Sturgeon, Scotland’s former first minister, has claimed that, if Esther Ghey was not at parliament today, MPs would not have objected to Rishi Sunak’s anti-trans jibe. She posted this on X. This was truly terrible from Sunak. But let’s not kid ourselves - had Brianna’s mum not been there today, no-one (including Keir Starmer) would have batted an eyelid.

It’s not good enough to stand against transphobia only when the mother of a murdered trans girl might be… https://t.co/2GYHZRevAj — Nicola Sturgeon (@NicolaSturgeon) February 7, 2024 This was truly terrible from Sunak. But let’s not kid ourselves - had Brianna’s mum not been there today, no-one (including Keir Starmer) would have batted an eyelid. It’s not good enough to stand against transphobia only when the mother of a murdered trans girl might be listening. It needs to be done all of the time. Share

7 Feb 2024 15.25 GMT Badenoch hits back at Labour in PMQs trans jibe row, accusing Starmer of exploiting Ghey tragedy for political purposes Kemi Badenoch, who combines being business secretary with being minister for women and equality, has put out a statement on X claiming it was “shameful” that Keir Starmer chose to use the murder of Brianna Ghey for “political point-scoring”. She also claimed that she personally had sought to take the heat out of the trans issue, and that it was Labour that was weaponising it. Every murder is a tragedy. None should be trivialised by political point-scoring. As a mother, I can imagine the trauma that Esther Ghey has endured.



It was shameful of Starmer to link his own inability to be clear on the matter of sex and gender directly to her grief. (1/2) — Kemi Badenoch (@KemiBadenoch) February 7, 2024 Every murder is a tragedy. None should be trivialised by political point-scoring. As a mother, I can imagine the trauma that Esther Ghey has endured. It was shameful of Starmer to link his own inability to be clear on the matter of sex and gender directly to her grief. (1/2) As Minister for Women and Equalities I’ve done all I can to ensure we have take the heat out of the debate on LGBT issues while being clear about our beliefs and principles. Keir Starmer’s behaviour today shows Labour are happy to weaponise this issue when it suits them (2/2) Share Updated at 15.25 GMT

7 Feb 2024 15.14 GMT Tory MP Nickie Aiken says she is standing down at next election. The Conservative MP Nickie Aiken has said that she is stepping down at the next election. A deputy chair of the Conservative party, she was only elected in 2019, but she says she is quitting because her husband, Alex Aiken, executive director for the Government Communication Service, is taking a job abroad. Aiken represents Cities of London and Westminster, where she had a majority of 3,953 at the last election. According to this list compiled by the House of Commons library, she is the 55th Tory to say they are standing down – or 58th if MPs elected as Conservatives but now sitting as independents are included. It has been the greatest honour to have been elected as a public servant for 18 years. However, I will not be seeking re-election.



I remain loyal to the Conservative Party and our Prime Minister, and I will continue to work hard for local people across the Two Cities. pic.twitter.com/A0AdkQgU9G — Nickie Aiken MP for Cities of London & Westminster (@twocitiesnickie) February 7, 2024 Share Updated at 15.16 GMT

7 Feb 2024 14.26 GMT In the Commons the SNP MP Hannah Bardell used a point of order to say that Rishi Sunak should apologise for his anti-trans jibe. She said she was “horrified” to hear Sunak “on his feet during LGBT history month, and on a day when Brianna Ghey’s mother was in parliament, to make a transphobic joke across the chamber”. She went on: We come to this place as elected representatives to improve the condition of others, do we not? And at a time when the trans community are facing unprecedented attacks from people in this place, from people in the other place, and from the media, it is incumbent upon as all to reflect on our language, on how we approach these issues and how we talk about the trans and non-binary community. I think and I hope [the deputy speaker] will guide me in how we can make sure the prime minister apologises. Dame Eleanor Laing, the deputy speaker, said it was not her job to require Rishi Sunak to “say anything different”. But she said paid tribute to Esther Ghey and she said “when a tragedy has occurred that we ought to show sympathy and understanding, and not always make political points”. Share

7 Feb 2024 14.09 GMT Stonewall says anti-trans jibes like Sunak's 'can and do result in harm' and calls for apology Stonewall, which campaigns on behalf of LGBTQ+ people, has joined opposition politicians in saying Rishi Sunak should apologise for his anti-trans jibe at PMQs. In a statement, it says dehumanising comments like this from people in power “can and do result in harm”. Our response to the Prime Minister Rishi Sunak's comments during #PMQs today: pic.twitter.com/OU7gLzvme8 — Stonewall (@stonewalluk) February 7, 2024 Share

7 Feb 2024 13.49 GMT Severin Carrell The Scottish National party still holds a clear lead over Labour in both Westminster and Holyrood elections, according to a new poll by Ipsos which does, however, show those leads being steadily eroded.



The Ipsos poll, for Scotland’s commercial broadcaster STV, puts the SNP seven points ahead in a Westminster election on 39%, versus 32% for Labour, and nine points in the constituency vote for Holyrood, on 39%. It said the SNP still maintains a lead in public trust in health, schools and the cost of living policies. Humza Yousaf’s advisers argue these findings undermine assumptions now taking root in Scotland that Labour is poised to beat the SNP in the general election, building on its drubbing of the SNP in last October’s Rutherglen byelection.



Other polls put Labour much closer to the SNP in a Westminster vote. Panelbase very recently put Labour three points ahead, and Redfield & Wilton has had Labour two points ahead or neck and neck with the SNP.



Anas Sarwar, the Scottish Labour leader, believes those findings put Labour on or very close to 35% in general election voting. Labour sees that as the magic number, a tipping point at which a large number of SNP seats come into play for Labour. Some pollsters believe Ipsos’s methodology is more accurate than other commercial polls. YouGov, Panelbase, Survation and Redfield & Wilton tend to use internet-based panels of people registered and sometimes incentivised to take part. Ipsos cold calls voters by telephone and arguably has a wider and more representative net of people to draw from.



However, today’s Ipsos data has warning bells for the SNP; it is tracking a continuing increase in Labour support. In May 2023, the SNP had a 12-point lead in a Westminster election, which fell to 10 points in November 2023. In the Holyrood vote, the SNP lead has fallen from 14 points last May, to 12 in November.



The same squeeze appears in trust ratings; the SNP trust ratings on the NHS, schools and the economy have fallen by five or six points since May 2022 and Labour’s have grown by seven in all three areas. Share

7 Feb 2024 13.44 GMT Treasury costings of opposition policies have 'little, if any, credibility', says ex Treasury permanent secretary Labour has also described the Treasury costing document used by CCHQ to argue that Labour’s insulation policy would cost £13bn a year (see 11.53pm) as ludicrous and wrong. A spokesperson said: This costing is ludicrous and uses bogus assumptions. They have costed someone else’s policy, not Labour’s. Nick Macpherson, who was permanent secretary at the Treasury from 2005 to 2016, seems to agree. In a post on X, he said: Over the next 9 months, we will have to tolerate many an “official Treasury” costing of Opposition policy. Since time immemorial, whatever the party in power, these costings have had little if any credibility. Political advisers determine the assumptions. #rubbishinrubbishout Over the next 9 months, we will have tobtolerate many an "official Treasury" costing of Opposition policy. Since time immemorial, whatever the party in power, these costings have had little if any credibility. Political advisers determine the assumptions. #rubbishinrubbishout — Nick Macpherson (@nickmacpherson2) February 7, 2024 Share