New Zealanders, including leaders from across the political spectrum, have expressed shock and devastation at the sudden death of Green MP Efeso Collins, who collapsed after a charity run in Auckland on Wednesday.

“It is with profound shock and sadness that we can confirm that Green Party MP Efeso Collins has died,” said a statement from the Green party.

“We are absolutely devastated. A beautiful family has lost a dedicated father, husband, and community leader.”

Collins, who was 49, entered parliament as a Green MP in the October 2023 general election, after six years as a Labour-party affiliated councillor for Auckland’s Manukau ward. In 2022, he ran for mayor of Auckland, coming second to Wayne Brown.

Collins collapsed after taking part in the ChildFund Water Run – a fundraising event for the charity working to bring clean drinking water to children in the Pacific, and which was a cause close to his heart, the Greens said.

“The on-site medical team immediately went to Efeso’s aid and did everything they could to revive him. We are grateful to them for acting so fast.”

“Aotearoa and the Green party have lost one of the kindest, most dedicated champions of fairness and equality.”

This clip tells you everything you need to know about what family meant to Efeso Collins.



An utterly devastating loss.



(Credit: @NewshubNationNZ) pic.twitter.com/YREkdLAYxb — Aaron Dahmen (@dahmenaaron) February 20, 2024

Collins, who was of Samoan and Tokelauan descent, gave his maiden speech to parliament less than a week ago, where he spoke about being the youngest of six children born in South Auckland suburb Ōtara to parents who arrived from Samoa in the early 1960s.

He spoke of growing up in state housing, and attending local schools. In recent years he had been reconnecting with Samoan language, and was bestowed with the chiefly title of Fa’anānā from his mother’s village in Samoa.

“If I was to inspire anyone by getting to this House and my work over the next three years, I hope that it’s the square pegs, the misfits, the forgotten, the unloved, the invisible – it’s the dreamers who want more, expect more, are impatient for change, and have this uncanny ability to stretch us further.”

Prime minister Christopher Luxon said he was shocked and saddened by Collins’ death.

“Efeso was a good man, always friendly and kind, and a true champion and advocate for his Samoan and South Auckland communities,” Luxon said. “Our thoughts and deepest sympathies go to his family, his community and colleagues.”

The Labour party’s deputy leader Carmel Sepuloni said Collins was “a passionate advocate for our community and a role model for the people of South Auckland and New Zealand’s Pacific community.”

“The loss of this courageous man will be felt by so many,” Sepuloni said.

Auckland Council chief executive, Phil Wilson, said the city had lost “a passionate and inspiring leader, whose contribution to local government and connection to the Auckland Council will forever be remembered”.

Collins, who had written opinion pieces for the Guardian, has been remembered by many on social media as a kind, compassionate man, who was a fierce advocate for Pasifika peoples and a compelling orator.

Efeso Collins was the first person I saw up close, as a teen, who was a natural, outstanding leader, so obviously marked for greatness no one even stopped to consider it. One of the country’s best orators and such an incredibly warm, positive and kind person. RIP Fa’anana — Ben Thomas (@BenThomasNZ) February 20, 2024

The Greens said Collins devoted his life to serving and making a difference.

“We will continue to aspire to the dedication and commitment Efeso showed to always put the greater good above our own. He showed us what that means every single day.”