From 10 Oct 2023 14.07 BST Protester interrupts start of Starmer's speech Keir Starmer has been interrupted by a protester, who grabbed/hugged him, shouting something like: ‘We demand green justice.’ He was covered with green glitter. UPDATE: Here is a picture. A protestor interrupts Keir Starmer's conference speech and throws glitter all over the Labour leader. Not a good look for security; but it will push Starmer's speech up the news headlines. And give him authenticity. #Lab #LabConf23 pic.twitter.com/7hiTdIUUM9 — Gerry Hassan 🇺🇦 (@GerryHassan) October 10, 2023 Share Updated at 14.14 BST

10 Oct 2023 17.57 BST Afternoon summary Keir Starmer has firmed up plans to make Labour the party of builders in his speech to the conference. Promising a new generation of new towns, and more building on low-quality green belt land that he dubbed “grey belt”, Starmer said he was determined to “fight the blockers who hold a veto over British aspiration” in housing. In a briefing on the speech, the Labour party said the plan consisted of five elements. It said they were: A housing recovery plan; a blitz of planning reform to quickly boost housebuilding to buy and rent and deliver the biggest boost to affordable housing in a generation, enhancing local voice on ‘how’ housing is built with communities confident plans will be delivered The next generation of ‘new towns’; new communities with beautiful homes, green spaces, reliable transport links and bustling high streets Unleashing mayors; a package of devolution to mayors, with stronger powers over planning and control over housing investment ‘Planning passport’ for urban brownfield development; with a fast track approval and delivery of high-density housing on urban brownfield sites First dibs for first-time buyers; supporting younger people the first chance at homes in new housing developments with a government-backed mortgage guarantee scheme. Starmer has made a direct and personal appeal for Conservative voters to back him at the general election. He said: If you are a Conservative voter who despairs of this, if you look in horror at the descent of your party into the murky waters of populism and conspiracy, with no argument for economic change. If you feel our country needs a party that conserves. That fights for our union. Our environment. The rule of law. Family life. The careful bond between this generation and the next. Then let me tell you: Britain already has one. And you can join it. It’s this Labour party. Starmer’s speech to his party’s conference was disrupted by a lone pro-PR protester who sprinkled the Labour leader with glitter before being hauled off stage. View image in fullscreen Keir Starmer delivering his speech. Photograph: James McCauley/Shutterstock Share Updated at 18.13 BST

10 Oct 2023 17.38 BST Jeremy Corbyn, the former Labour leader, does not seem impressed by his successor’s speech. As the Labour leadership rolls out the red carpet for climate vandals, arms firms and private healthcare, thousands of us are organising for the bold change this country needs.



We will keep campaigning for social justice and peace.



We are the movement for the many, not the few. As the Labour leadership rolls out the red carpet for climate vandals, arms firms and private healthcare, thousands of us are organising for the bold change this country needs.



We will keep campaigning for social justice and peace.



We are the movement for the many, not the few. — Jeremy Corbyn (@jeremycorbyn) October 10, 2023 Share

10 Oct 2023 17.35 BST And the SNP has issued its response to Keir Starmer’s speech. This is from its social justice spokesperson, David Linden. For all the empty rhetoric, Sir Keir Starmer remains wedded to Tory austerity cuts, Brexit and the same damaging Westminster policies that got the UK into this mess.



Families are suffering from the soaring cost of living in the UK and need help right now – but Sir Keir failed to outline a single policy to help households this winter, and his admission the Labour party will continue to impose a hard Tory Brexit will choke off economic growth permanently. Share Updated at 17.47 BST

10 Oct 2023 17.19 BST For the record, this is what Greg Hands, the Conservative party chair, is saying in response to Keir Starmer’s speech. Once again Sir Keir Starmer showed he would take the easy way out on Britain’s long-term challenges. On two of the biggest issues facing our country, Labour has nothing to say. Just as Rachel Reeves failed to mention inflation once in her speech, Sir Keir failed to say anything about how he would tackle illegal immigration. Instead, he committed Labour to more borrowing, which would increase inflation, and reversing Rishi Sunak’s more proportionate approach to net zero, forcing millions of families to pay up to £15,000 to upgrade their homes. Sir Keir just offers more of the same short-term political decision-making of the last 30 years that has failed Britain – all glitter, no substance. Rishi Sunak and the Conservatives are working to halve inflation, grow the economy, reduce debt, cut waiting lists and stop the boats. And only Rishi Sunak will take the long-term decisions needed to build a brighter future. Share

10 Oct 2023 17.00 BST Starmer wins praise from free market Tories for his plan to tackle obstacles that hold back building Rightwingers on the free market wing of Tory politics like what Keir Starmer said about releasing “grey belt” land for housebuilding. This is from Kate Andrews, the Spectator economics editor and omnipresent rightwing pundit. I've thought for a long time that the party that grasps the nettle on housing will see huge electoral success. Lots of promises made, but Starmer's speech today is a game-changer. Mention of green-belt makes me think a party is finally serious about this. And it's Labour. #LPC23 — Kate Andrews (@KateAndrs) October 10, 2023 This is from Simon Clarke, the Tory former levelling up secretary. The “green belt” isn’t all beautiful verdant land. This all-too-effective title has allowed politicians and NIMBYs to hide behind it for too long to block much-needed new homes. My party needs to respond to this challenge. https://t.co/wC7evOInGV — Simon Clarke MP (@SimonClarkeMP) October 10, 2023 And this is from Robert Colvile, head of the Centre for Policy Studies thinktank and one of the authors of the 2019 Tory manifesto. It is a disgrace that the Tories have let Labour steal their clothing as the party of housebuilding. That section of Starmer's speech was excellent, but given the scale of the housing crisis, this should be absolutely cross-party. — Robert Colvile (@rcolvile) October 10, 2023 For the record, this is what Starmer said about housing. So today we launch a new plan to get Britain building again. A signal of our determination to fight the blockers who hold a veto over British aspiration. No more land-bankers sitting comfortably on brownfield sites while rents in their community rise. No more councils refusing to develop a local plan because they prefer the back-door deals. No more inertia in the face of resistance – and there will be resistance from people who say – no, we don’t want Britain’s future here. My message to them is this. A future must be built. That is the responsibility of a serious government. And if we continually wash our hands of this task – we all end up stuck in a rut. Just like now. So it’s time to get Britain building again. It’s time to build one and half million new homes across the country …. Labour is the party that protects our green spaces. No party fights harder for our environment. We created the national parks. Created the green-belt in the first place. I grew up in Surrey. But where there are clearly ridiculous uses of it, disused car parks, dreary wasteland. Not a green belt. A grey belt. Sometimes within a city’s boundary. Then this cannot be justified as a reason to hold our future back. We will take this fight on. That’s a Britain built to last. Share Updated at 17.58 BST

10 Oct 2023 16.36 BST Here is some more footage of the protest, from the News Agents podcast. The moment Keir Starmer was covered in glitter by a protestor as he started his party conference speech...



The man was dragged out by security to a disapproving audience, who cheered the Labour leader on. pic.twitter.com/m75AmpcieI — The News Agents (@TheNewsAgents) October 10, 2023 Share

10 Oct 2023 16.28 BST The person who disrupted Keir Starmer’s speech has been arrested, ITV News reports. Merseyside police confirms that a 28-year-old man from Surrey has been arrested on suspicion of S39 assault, breach of the peace and causing public nuisance after Keir Starmer’s conference speech was stormed by a protester with glitter Merseyside Police confirms that a 28-year-old man from Surrey has been arrested on suspicion of S39 assault, breach of the peace and causing public nuisance after Keir Starmer's conference speech was stormed by a protester with glitter https://t.co/qp4HbqGYzs pic.twitter.com/Z7C7Xd1sXF — ITV News Politics (@ITVNewsPolitics) October 10, 2023 Share Updated at 16.56 BST

10 Oct 2023 16.22 BST Yaz Ashmawi, named as the protester who threw glitter on Keir Starmer, is an Extinction Rebellion (XR) activist, but the climate group said the stunt was not organised by them, PA Media reports. An XR spokesperson said: We agree with Yaz that true democracy is citizen-led and that our politics needs an update. The greatest crisis we are facing is the climate and nature emergency and it is clear the political system is unable to cope with this. This is why XR is demanding a UK-wide, independently run citizens’ assembly on the climate and nature emergencies. Share Updated at 16.47 BST

10 Oct 2023 16.21 BST Momentum, the leftwing Labour group set up when Jeremy Corbyn was leader to promote his agenda, said Keir Starmer was not radical enough in his speech. Hilary Schan, Momentum co-chair, said: Keir Starmer was right to say that, after 13 years of Tory misrule, we need national renewal akin to the post-war Labour government. But by failing to back up this fine rhetoric with cold hard cash, Keir Starmer has fatally undermined his own prospects. You can’t fix a broken country on the cheap … The tragic reality here is that the Labour leadership is guilty of the very sticking plaster politics it rightly derides. Momentum wants nationalisation of public services and higher taxes for the rich. Share

10 Oct 2023 15.56 BST Starmer's speech - snap verdict There are two ways of approaching a party conference speech: using it as springboard for a big, preferably unexpected policy announcement (or several); or using to make an argument. Rishi Sunak delivered the first sort of speech last week, with mixed results. Keir Starmer’s speech was firmly in the second category. Newswise, there was nothing in it that had not been briefed overnight (see 8.57am) and even most of the stuff briefed overnight would have been familiar to anyone who has spent time in in the weeds of Labour policy documents. Instead, the speech was going to survive or fail on the strength of its argument and even here Starmer was not really breaking new ground. He has left journalists in the press room scratching their heads. What’s the line? In one respect, that’s a problem. The speech seemed to go on a bit, and there weren’t many knockout lines. But the Labour party is 15 points or more ahead of the Conservatives, and in practically every area of policy, voters think Labour can be trusted to deliver more than the Tories. Arguably the party does not need a shiny new policy offer. The Conservatives argue that, while they will never win in a Tory v Labour contest, they have a better chance in a Sunak v Starmer contest because the Labour party is massively more popular than the Conservative party, but Starmer is only slightly more popular than Sunak. So, if they are right, character matters. And it was perhaps in this respect that the speech was most successful. Starmer often talks about his dad having worked in a factory, but as a middle-class professional with a knighthood, he has struggled to convince people he is working-class. Today there was a much more passionate, authentic working-class edge to what he was saying, and it came out, not just when he talked about empathising with someone who could not afford to go on holiday, but in the two most powerful passages in the speech. The first was the passage about respect. I believe this country respects itself. I believe the British people respect each other. And I believe that if people see that respect, see that service in their politics, then they will commit to the mission of national renewal. Let me put it this way. At some point in your life, many people here will have heard a nagging voice inside, saying no, this isn’t for you. You don’t belong here. You can’t do that. Working-class people certainly hear that voice, trust me. In some ways it’s the hardest class ceiling of all. But conference, imagine if instead a whole country said: you do belong. Imagine if a whole country said we back your potential. Imagine if a whole country commits, properly, to unlocking the pride you have for your community. And the second was in the peroration. We have to be disciplined. Focused. Ready to fight back. And confident, conference, because we have come so far, already. We’ve dragged this party back to service. We can do the same for politics. I grew up working-class. I’ve been fighting all my life. And I won’t stop now. I’ve felt the anxiety of a cost of living crisis before. And until your family can see the way out, I will fight for you. Many politicians say things like this – but very few do so with the sort of conviction and authenticity that was on display from Starmer today. Voters say they don’t know much about him, but this should shift the dial, for the good. Starmer was also lucky. He may have felt the pro-PR direct action protest at the start was a disruption, but he responded calmly, with dignity and authority. And whoever persuaded him to take his jacket off did him a favour, because that looked better too. Overall verdict? Probably not his best speech, but strong enough to cap what has definitely been his best conference. Share Updated at 16.52 BST

10 Oct 2023 15.24 BST Pro-PR group called People Demand Democracy says it organised glitter protest A group called People Demand Democracy has claimed responsibility for a protest in which Keir Starmer was covered in glitter, PA Media reports. PA says; The organisation, described as “friends” by Just Stop Oil, is calling for a “a fair, proportional voting system for Westminster elections”, as well as a “legally binding national House of Citizens” to be selected by democratic lottery. In a press release, the group said: The people of the UK are more disillusioned by the state of our politics than at any time in living memory – look at the polls. After years of battling over Brexit, lockdown parties, abuse claims, crumbling public services and crashing living standards, people are sick to the back teeth of politicians. And we are furious there is no way to make our voices heard. This has got to change. We need a democratic alternative that gives the people of the UK a voice to deal with the major challenges of our time: rampant inequality, an escalating climate crisis, political corruption and on. But what do we have instead? A Labour party offering very little in terms of real change. The group included a quote from the protester, whom it did not name in its press release, saying: The Labour party has been captured, donors and lobbyists have more control over Keir Starmer than his members. A House of Citizens will force politicians to listen to people, it dismantles their relationships with the rich, it would create meaningful change in our economy and fix inequality. It would address the climate and ecological emergency and transform our country. It would listen to scientists and communities and unearth consensus, not profit off conflict and division. Share Updated at 16.49 BST

10 Oct 2023 15.05 BST Starmer says they have dragged their party back, and can do the same for their politics. We’ve dragged this party back to service. We can do the same for politics. I grew up working class. I’ve been fighting all my life. And I won’t stop now. I’ve felt the anxiety of a cost of living crisis before. And until your family can see the way out, I will fight for you. And he ends by saying Labour has a plan for Britain to last. A plan to turn the page and say, in a cry of defiance to all those who now write our country off: Britain must, Britain can, Britain will get its future back. And that’s it. Share

10 Oct 2023 15.01 BST Starmer says the Rutherglen and West Hamilton byelection shows Labour serves the working people of Scotland because it serves the people of Britain. He says taking on the SNP will involve a fight – they will regroup. And the Tories are prepared “to scorch the earth just to get at us”. Wherever you think the line is, they’ve already got plans to cross it. Share

10 Oct 2023 14.59 BST Starmer says, while Sunak wants to 'row back on our climate misson', he wants to 'speed ahead' Starmer says people are paying higher bills because the Tories did not build gas storage, did not invest in green energy, and did not fix home insulation. This is sticking-plaster politics, he says. He says Labour would turn the page. Here is the plan for growth, he says. First, a national wealth fund, ready to invest in infrastructure. Second, long-term stability for researchers and investment. Third, a new direction for skills. Labour will set up technical excellence colleges. And, fourth, a new mindset – recognising the opportunity offered by green jobs. So when Rishi Sunak says row back on our climate mission, I say speed ahead. Speed ahead with investment. Speed ahead with half a million jobs. Speed ahead with Great British Energy. The new company, GB Energy, will be set up in Scotland, he says. Share Updated at 15.00 BST

10 Oct 2023 14.53 BST PA Media has more on the fate of the protester. The protester who stormed the stage as Keir Starmer began his speech shouted “democracy first” as he was removed from the conference venue in Liverpool. Media had assembled around the rear exit as he was placed in a police van and driven away. Share