16 Apr 2024 18.55 BST Dame Andrea Leadsom, the health and social care minister, has disclosed she began smoking aged 14 behind the bicycle sheds. After smoking up to 40 a day, she said she quit by her 21st birthday. Share

16 Apr 2024 18.50 BST Former immigration minister Robert Jenrick has become the latest high-profile Conservative to signal his intention to vote against the government’s proposed smoking ban. He wrote on X: “I believe in personal freedom. Let’s educate more and ban less. “I also believe in the principle of equality under the law. A phased ban of smoking would be an affront to that. I will therefore vote against the Tobacco and Vapes Bill. “I respect those who disagree. The proponents have good intentions. “I’ve seen the harmful effects of smoking in my own family, so I understand their perspective. “But the best way to reduce smoking is to continue to educate, not a ban that will prove a nightmare to enforce.” I believe in personal freedom. Let’s educate more and ban less.



I also believe in the principle of equality under the law. A phased ban of smoking would be an affront to that.



I will therefore vote against the Tobacco and Vapes Bill. (1/2) — Robert Jenrick (@RobertJenrick) April 16, 2024 Share

16 Apr 2024 18.45 BST Dame Andrea Leadsom, the health and social care minister, said the government is spending £138 million on stop smoking services which is double than before. She also accused Wes Streeting of playing politics and not having anything sensible to say about the Bill. The Bill would make it illegal to sell tobacco products to anyone born after January 1 2009, which covers children who are currently 15 or younger, but does not criminalise current smokers. Share

16 Apr 2024 18.39 BST Preet Gill, the shadow health and social care minister, says she supports the tobacco and vapes bill. But highlights that over the past 14 years, healthl life expectancy has dropped for the first time in modern British history. Share

16 Apr 2024 18.30 BST In an additional blow to the Conservative frontbench, peers voted by 275 to 218, majority 57, to press a demand for those who worked with the UK military or government overseas, such as Afghan interpreters, to be exempted from removal to Rwanda. Share

16 Apr 2024 18.24 BST Over to the House of Lords and the Rwanda vote. In a third government defeat, the Lords again insisted by 253 votes to 236, majority 17, on an amendment to restore the jurisdiction of domestic courts in relation to the safety of Rwanda and enable them to intervene. Share

16 Apr 2024 18.17 BST Tory minister Anne-Marie Trevelyan has also come out against the government’s proposed smoking ban. The foreign office minister wrote on X: “I have pondered long and hard about how to vote and have decided that in its present form I cannot support it. “This is just stage one of the legislation and I hope that at the next stage we can make amendments which will make it law which will be more likely to actually deter young smokers without removing freedom of choice for adults. “My granny smoked all her life, the rest of us have always been opposed to it as a result. But her ability to decide for herself is one which I would not want to remove. “So what might work? That we raise the age of being allowed to smoke to 21, since most young people start before they are 20. “Logically this will therefore see far far fewer people take up the bad habit in the first place.” We have the seen the work over a number of years to discourage smoking being more and more effective; higher taxation of tobacco products also having an impact, and education on good health continuing to help young people make good choices. — Anne-Marie Trevelyan MP (@annietrev) April 16, 2024 Share

16 Apr 2024 18.12 BST Government suffers two more defeats in Lords on Rwanda bill, losing by majorities of 39 and 17 The government lost the second vote in the House of Lords on the Rwanda bill by 266 votes to 227 – a majority of 39. Peers backed the motion saying only be considered a safe country if an independent monitoring committee confirms that. (See 5.51pm.) And peers have just finished voting on motion C1, that would allow courts to continue to decide Rwanda is not safe in individual cases. The government lost a third time, by 253 votes to 236 – a majority of 17. Share

16 Apr 2024 18.04 BST Kemi Badenoch becomes first cabinet minister to say they will vote against smoking ban bill Andrew Sparrow Kemi Badenoch, the business secretary and minister for women and equalities, has said she will vote against the smoking bill tonight. She is the first cabinet minister to confirm they are voting against Rishi Sunak on that. He has granted MPs a free vote, but he would still prefer his cabinet minister to support him. Badenoch has explained her thinking in posts on X. Interestingly, while it was assumed that many Tories would oppose the bill on liberty grounds, Badenoch is opposing it primarily on equality grounds (like some other Tories speaking in the debate – see 4.38pm and 5.31pm.) I’m not a smoker and think it is an unpleasant habit, costly for both the individual and society.

The PM's intentions with this Bill are honest and mark him out as a leader who doesn't duck the thorny issues.



I agree with his policy intentions BUT….(1/4) — Kemi Badenoch (@KemiBadenoch) April 16, 2024 I’m not a smoker and think it is an unpleasant habit, costly for both the individual and society.

The PM’s intentions with this Bill are honest and mark him out as a leader who doesn’t duck the thorny issues.

I agree with his policy intentions BUT….(1/4) I have significant concerns and appreciate the PM making this a free vote. It gives me the opportunity to express my personal view, outside collective responsibility. The principle of equality under the law is a fundamental one. It underpins many of my personal beliefs..(2/4) We should not treat legally competent adults differently in this way, where people born a day apart will have permanently different rights. Among other reasons it will create difficulties with enforcement. This burden will fall not on the state but on private businesses… (3/4) Smoking rates are already declining significantly in the UK and I think there is more we can do to stop children taking up the habit. However, I do not support the approach this bill is taking and so will be voting against it. (4/4) That is all from me for tonight. My colleague Nadeem Badshah is taking over now. Share