1 Dec 2023 13.11 GMT Here are some more highlights from the leaders’ speeches, by Bibi van der Zee and I. Wavel John Charles Ramkalawan, president of the Seychelles, said he was disheartened that so many financial commitments on climate change were yet to be fulfilled despite the urgency of the crisis. “Small island developing states are on the frontline of climate change,” he told the summit. They urgently need money to deal with the coastal erosion they are seeing. “We made history by operationalising the loss and damage fund on the first day of this Cop … It is vital that this fund is equitable and genuinely helpful.” The Seychelles is an environmental champion which already protects 32% of its marine land, but it is categorised as a high-income country, and Ramkalawan is extremely concerned that this will affect their ability to access LAD funding. View image in fullscreen South Africa’s president, Cyril Ramaphosa, and Seychelles’ president, Wavel Ramkalawan. Photograph: Thomas Mukoya/Reuters Turkey’s Recep Tayyip Erdoğan was another leader who made comparisons between the war in Gaza and the climate crisis. He said: “Turkey has stood by peace during all these crises and works towards finding solutions on the basis of equity. We approach the issue of climate change from the same perspective.” He pointed out that Turkey is the second in Europe and ninth in the world for hydro energy. He said despite the devastating earthquake in February they are managing to keep on track for their goals and are “healing the wounds” of the disaster while building “climate and environment friendly” structures. Zuzana Čaputová, president of Slovakia, asked the summit: “How much more do we want to harm future generations?” Her country’s emissions have peaked already, and are 55% lower than they were in 1980. They plan to use 5% of GDP from public sources to decarbonise their country and by the end of this year will stop using coal to generate electricity. Share Updated at 13.27 GMT

1 Dec 2023 12.55 GMT Patrick Greenfield Steven Guilbeault, Canada’s environment minister, has said the loss and damage fund should help rebuild trust between the global north and south after years of tense negotiations. Earlier today, Canada committed US$11.8m to the new fund, which will be housed within the World Bank. Guilbeault also said his country was happy to support language on reducing fossil fuels that was consistent with Canada’s 2050 carbon neutrality target. “It is significant. For 30 years, we made absolutely no progress on loss and damage. We went from nothing about a year ago to a fund and countries pledging money today. I think for the global south, this is a very significant issue. Between that and the $100bn dollar goal, I think these are very important elements that will help restore trust. Trust is the fuel of this process. I think it bodes well for the next two weeks,” he said. View image in fullscreen Workers adjust the flag of Canada in the runup to Cop28. Photograph: Peter Dejong/AP “It’s not a recognition that we are willing to take on liability from the results of climate change. But as large emitters, we have a role to play. We have a greater role to play in supporting the global south.” When asked whether Canada supports language to phase out all fossil fuels, a key point of contention at the Cop28 summit, Guilbeault said his country was open to different forms of language in the final text and underscored that fossil fuel production would have to drop. “We support language that’s aligned with our commitment to be carbon neutral by 2050. Whether you want to call it phasing out unabated fossil fuels or say it in a different way. Some people would like us to say we want to phase out all fossil fuels but even the IPCC and the IEA still say in a 2050 carbon neutral world that we will still be using fossil fuels,” he said. “I don’t know how realistic it is to say we will phase them all out but what’s important is that we radically reduce our dependence on fossil fuels. And for those that we are using, we need to capture and sequester the emissions. We don’t have a choice. But we need to see significant emission reduction from the oil and gas centre. We can’t do that through abatement technology. There is going to be a reduction in production,” he said. Share Updated at 13.59 GMT

1 Dec 2023 12.50 GMT Veteran climate reporter Roger Harrabin, who used to work for the BBC and is now freelance – sometimes writing for the Guardian – points out that only political journalists, not environmental specialists, have been allowed into an event with Rishi Sunak. Harrabin says he was “kicked out”. I’ve just been kicked out of this ‘private event’ - a lobby conference with @rishisunak about to start. I’ve been reporting on climate for 35 years so it’s possible I know more than most Pollcorrs. That’s why the environment corrs are left outside. ⁦@fionaharvey⁩ ⁦ pic.twitter.com/IZ4aNBPBfh — Roger Harrabin (@RHarrabin) December 1, 2023 We have a brilliant reporter in there and will bring you the news from his press conference, but it is true that this government often hides from scrutiny and one of the ways it does that is by barring specialist reporters from its briefings. Our environment editor, Fiona Harvey, has also reported troubles in accessing press conferences at the summit. Journalists being told we can’t access the main press conference room #Cop28 without special tickets. And an escort. Security won’t let us through. This is absurd. Not transparent and very not helpful. — Fiona Harvey (@fionaharvey) December 1, 2023 Share Updated at 13.32 GMT

1 Dec 2023 12.45 GMT The leader’s speeches continue. Here are some updates from myself and one of my editors, Bibi van der Zee, who is also listening in. Santiago Peña, president of Paraguay, said: “In my country of Paraguay all energy is clean and renewable. Yes you heard that, it is all clean and renewable.” He’s right – the Itaipu Dam, located on the Paraná River, is one of the largest hydroelectric power plants in the world and generates about 95% of Paraguay’s electricity, all of which comes from renewable sources. View image in fullscreen The Itaipu Dam. Photograph: Imagebroker/Alamy He also pointed out that 44% of their land surface is forest, and asked China to allow Taiwan to be included in the Cop process – the small country is currently barred at the instruction of the Chinese government. Kassym-Jomart Tokayev, the president of Kazakhstan, has pledged to join the global methane pledge. He says there is extraordinary potential for wind and solar in his country – a key oil exporter - and also points out that Kazakhstan is poised to become a major source of rare earth minerals. Tokayev is planning to convene a regional climate summit in 2024 under UN auspices. President of Serbia, Aleksandar Vučić, said that temperatures in his country have increased by 1.8C already. Serbians experienced uncomfortable “tropical nights” over 20C degrees celcius for the first time this October, which he said was “unprecedented for the region”. Abdul Latif Rashid, president of Iraq, drew on the history of the region, pointing out that his predecessors in Mesopotamia, 4,500 years ago, drew up the first agreement for sharing water resources, and warned the summit that the famous rivers of Iraq were now under threat from drought linked to climate change. “The drought in the south of Iraq, the record level temperatures, desertification, and sand storms have led to economic challenges that resulted in a larger level of poverty and internal displacement.” He urged the gulf countries to act as a unified bloc, and condemned the aggressive attack on Gaza. Share Updated at 13.43 GMT

1 Dec 2023 12.36 GMT ‘Planetary emergency’: droughts, the deadliest of disasters Damian Carrington Droughts supercharged by global heating are “an unprecedented emergency on a planetary scale”, according to a UN report released on Friday at Cop28, leading to food shortages and famine. While other climate impacts such as heatwaves, wildfires and floods often hit the headlines, droughts are often silent disasters, the report said, and “the massive impacts of human-induced droughts are only starting to unfold”. The report is from the UN Convention to Combat Desertification (UNCCD), which is an international agreement on good land stewardship. It says “few if any hazards claim more lives, causes more economic loss and affects more sectors of societies than drought”. Ibrahim Thiaw, UNCCD executive secretary, said: “Unlike other disasters, droughts happen silently, often going unnoticed and failing to provoke an immediate public and political response. This silent devastation perpetuates a cycle of neglect, leaving affected populations to bear the burden in isolation.” “With the frequency and severity of drought events increasing, as reservoir levels dwindle and crop yields decline, as we continue to lose biological diversity and famines spread, transformational change is needed,” he said. Extreme droughts that have wrecked the lives of millions of people in Syria, Iraq and Iran since 2020 would not have happened without human-caused global heating, a recent study found. The climate crisis also made the record drought across the northern hemisphere in summer 2022 at least 20 times more likely, scientists have calculated. Without human-caused global heating, the event would have been expected only once every four centuries. “Several countries already experience climate-change-induced famine,” said the UNCD report. “Forced migration surges globally; violent water conflicts are on the rise; the ecological base that enables all life on Earth is eroding more quickly than at any time in known human history.” The report cited a string of scientific findings: 120 million people are people expected to experience extreme drought even if global temperatures are restricted to 1.5C. Current policies are on track for 3C of heating, meaning extreme drought for 170 million people

In China, 15-20% of the population face more frequent moderate-to-severe droughts this century

1.2 million people in the Central American dry corridor are in need of food aid after five years of drought, heatwaves and unpredictable rainfall the drought in the La Plata basin of Brazil and Argentina in 2022 was the worst in 78 years, reducing crop production and affecting global markets The report notes that those who have done the least to cause the climate crisis are most exposed: 85% of those affected by droughts live in low- or middle-income countries. The report said better farming techniques, such as drought-resistant crops, efficient irrigation methods, no-till farming, can reduce the impact of drought on farmers’ crops and incomes. The International Drought Resilience Alliance, which was launched at Cop27, by the leaders of Spain and Senegal at Cop27, is creating political momentum and mobilising money and technology for a drought-resilient future and now has 34 member nations. Share Updated at 13.47 GMT

1 Dec 2023 12.27 GMT Brazil's Lula: 'it is not possible to face climate change without combating inequality' Jonathan Watts The President of Brazil, Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva, said his country was leading by example: “We have adjusted our climate goals, which are now more ambitious than those of many developed countries. We have drastically reduced deforestation in the Amazon and will bring it to zero by 2030,” he said. Lula, as he is best known, called for developed countries to invest more to reduce greenhouse gas emissions and to support developing nations who are suffering from climate impacts. “The planet is fed up with unfulfilled climate agreements. Governments cannot escape their responsibilities. No country will solve its problems alone. We are all obliged to act together beyond our borders”, he argued. He told delegates that the trillions of dollars spent on weapons should be used against hunger, inequality and climate change: “The world has naturalised unacceptable disparities in income, gender and race and that it is not possible to face climate change without combating inequality.” He spoke of climate suffering in the Amazon, which is experiencing one of the “most tragic droughts in its history” while cyclones in the south of Brazil have left a trail “of destruction and death”. Although his energy minister announced yesterday that Brazil will align more closely with the world’s biggest oil syndicate, Opec, Lula said it was necessary to “work for an economy less dependent on fossil fuels.” As an aside, we have reported on this inequality in our series The Great Carbon Divide. Share Updated at 13.51 GMT

1 Dec 2023 12.10 GMT Helena Smith A royal observation that may have gone unnoticed but over in Greece is causing waves of excitement. King Charles’s address has been well received in Athens and not only for his dramatic call for climate action to save the planet for future generations. The Greek media has noted with a touch of euphoria that the British monarch was donning a Greek-motif tie and breast pocket handkerchief – signalling (or so it has been interpreted) his support for the return to Athens of the Parthenon marbles in the wake of this week’s row over the antiquities. View image in fullscreen King Charles III makes his opening address at the World Climate Action Summit at Cop28 in Dubai. Photograph: Chris Jackson/PA Charles, who regularly holidays in Greece, the country of his father’s birth, has frequently spoken of his great love and passion for all things Hellenic. The king cannot publicly take a stance in the centuries-long row over whether the 2,500-year-old sculptures are better exhibited in the Duveen gallery of the British Museum or the Parthenon gallery of the Acropolis Museum beneath the fifth-century BC temple but in this instance his sartorial choice, say Greeks, appears a little more than symbolic. Share Updated at 13.49 GMT

1 Dec 2023 12.06 GMT World leaders are using their Cop speeches to push other political points. Gitanas Nausėda, president of Lithuania, said the Russian president, Vladimir Putin, has committed “ecocide” in his war against Ukraine and should not be about to get away with it. Emmerson Mnangagwa, the president of Zimbabwe, said “economic sanctions placed on our country are hindering climate action”. He demanded the lifting of what he described as the “heinous sanctions”. These sanctions were put in place by the US, UK and EU in 2022 because of human rights violations such as murdering protesters, and not respecting democracy and the rule of law. Share Updated at 13.50 GMT

1 Dec 2023 11.54 GMT Ursula von der Leyen calls for world to follow EU with carbon pricing Ursula von der Leyen, president of the European Commission, had a focus on “loss and damage” in her speech. She said: At this Cop we will set a decisive step forward to protect the most vulnerable citizens worldwide. They suffer loss and damage and we will stand by their side. She added: “Global emissions must peak by 2025, we must phase out fossil fuels and we must reduce methane emissions” Von der Leyen said the EU would contribute to the new loss and damage fund, and that they’ve pledged more than £270m so far. “We must get the fund up and running and we must do it fast,” she added. In terms of private finance, she said: “We need to reform the international financial system, we need more carbon pricing.” Share Updated at 11.58 GMT