Older Australians are living their best life, while weary younger cohorts are cutting back even on essentials, as a growing generational wealth gap threatens to take hold, researchers and financial experts warn.

As the country’s more mature residents enjoy fast-rising savings accounts and unprecedented amounts of income flowing from their retirement funds, the outlook has rarely been so bleak for younger people, data analysis shows.

Many in the younger generations missed out on Australia’s extended stretch of uninterrupted economic growth – and related share market and property price rises – and are now weighed down by oppressive living costs, soaring rents and rising mortgage repayments, with little in savings to fall back on.

Prof Lucas Walsh, director of the Monash centre for youth policy and education practice, says the recent inflationary period marked by rising interest rates has exacerbated the divide.

“This is the thing about the pandemic period: it highlighted, amplified and accelerated pre-existing conditions, economic conditions and social cohesion issues,” Walsh says.

“A shift of wealth has taken place.”

The Reserve Bank has implemented 13 rapid-fire interest rate rises since May last year to suppress demand in its bid to bring down inflation and they are weighing heavily on those with debt.

In Australia, young people have the majority of home loans, which means their debt repayments have risen quickly. Those who are tenants have suffered huge rent rises amid a national housing shortage.

Older cohorts have the majority of deposits, now buoyed by elevated savings rates.

Martin Conlon, head of Australian equities at asset manager Schroders, says the dynamic represents a transfer in wealth from young to old.

“With all the assets having been transferred to the old, to then put interest rates up and say to the youth of the economy that again, you’ve got to transfer more of your wealth to the elderly, is really – in our eyes – increasing the tension,” Conlon said in a September webinar.

“That increase in tension and income inequality and wealth inequality around the world is a massive issue, and we think it will be a big one for the next 10 years.”

The growing unease has not yet shown up in a major economic shock, with Australia’s big lenders all recently reporting modest levels of mortgage defaults, still below pre-pandemic levels.

But the financial stress is there.

ANZ figures show that at the end of September there was $13bn in late loans, including mortgages, whereby the holder was behind on repayments anywhere from one to 90 days or more. This represents a rise of more than one-third from a year earlier.

There was also a 92% increase in the size of 60-89 day loan arrears, which shows there are many about to default.

The ratings agency Fitch considers all loans more than 90 days behind as being in default, given the almost insurmountable task for a borrower to recover from such a deficit.

Trent Wiltshire, the Grattan Institute deputy program director for migration and labour markets, says the biggest distinction between generations is evident in housing.

“It’s really clear those most affected over the last few years are low-income renters and the people least affected are outright homeowners,” says Wiltshire, who advocates for a bigger boost to government rent assistance.

He says rising rates have a disproportionate impact on younger Australians.

“Older, wealthier households have typically got large saving buffers, so they basically have been unaffected by higher rates and continue to spend, whereas it is younger households with mortgages and renters who are really tightening their belts.”

skip past newsletter promotion Sign up to Afternoon Update Free daily newsletter Our Australian afternoon update breaks down the key stories of the day, telling you what’s happening and why it matters Privacy Notice: Newsletters may contain info about charities, online ads, and content funded by outside parties. For more information see our Newsletters may contain info about charities, online ads, and content funded by outside parties. For more information see our Privacy Policy . We use Google reCaptcha to protect our website and the Google Privacy Policy and Terms of Service apply. after newsletter promotion

Younger people cut as over-55s spend more

To be sure, financial stress is not only for newer, younger borrowers and renters. There are also those retiring with significant mortgage debt, as well as older Australians with limited savings, who are now under duress.

Each generation also has its own burdens. Inflation soared in the 1970s and 80s, and unemployment rose to double digits in the 90s. Those retiring during the global financial crisis watched the value of their assets plunge.

Fast-forward to 2023 and unemployment levels are at 3.7%, near historical lows, meaning younger people can generally secure a job, or two, to make ends meet.

Still, the Reserve Bank is warning that demand is strong, and that rates will remain high, despite younger people dramatically cutting their spending.

CommBank iQ, a joint venture between the Commonwealth Bank and data firm Quantium Group, has found that those aged between 25 and 29 have adjusted their spending the most, with cuts even to essential items over the past year.

Meanwhile, those 55 and over have been spending more on just about everything. This includes essential and non-essential items, such as travel and entertainment.

The spending is being fuelled by ballooning deposits and huge amounts of income being generated by retirement accounts, with broker UBS finding that quarterly superannuation benefits have boomed to a near-record high of $29bn.

Over a 12-month period, UBS estimates total benefits spiked to a record high of about $145bn, dramatically raising disposable income for retirees.

“The surge in benefits paid is strongly boosting the [effective] income available for older households who have reached preservation age,” UBS Australia’s chief economist, George Tharenou, says.

“This is underpinning the consumption of older households.”

Meanwhile, Monash’s annual youth barometer found that most Australians aged 18 to 24 had experienced financial difficulties in the past year, with one in five facing food insecurity.

Walsh, the lead researcher, says financial strains are also weighing on the outlook of young people, with more than half of those surveyed believing they will be financially worse off than their parents.

“The lack of wealth is a very present concern that is also affecting their attitudes to the future,” Walsh says.

“What we’re seeing is an awareness not only of the acute pressures of rising cost of living, but also that a shift of wealth has taken place and interest rates are adding to that pressure.”