Sunak rules out cutting value of pensions to fund his proposed plan to get rid of national insurance

SNP's Stephen Flynn says troops should only be deployed delivering aid in Gaza if MPs vote in favour

So I think it’s really important that especially when journalists talk about this, that you take the heat out. It’s not helpful. It is really unhelpful to call this culture wars. We’re trying to do the right thing by children and women in particular.

And now we have the Cass review and the report that is actually a medical scandal.

Four years ago, when I was alerting people to the danger of puberty blockers, and a lot of the issues that we had in clinics, people like you were accusing me of fighting culture wars.

In a separate interview with Times Radio, Badenoch objected when a presenter suggested she was waging a culture war. She said:

Phillipson also suggested that it was hypocritical for Badenoch to stress her support for single-sex wards in hospital when there has been “a massive explosion in the use of mixed sex wards because the NHS is an absolutely parlous state”.

[Badenoch] does love nothing more than a culture war. And it is so transparent what she is doing. She is pitching to Conservative members for the leadership contest to come in the Conservative party. And frankly, our country deserves a lot better than it always being about the Conservative party.

Speaking about the initiative announced by Badenoch this morning (see 10.10am ), Bridget Phillipson , the shadow education secreary, told Times Radio this morning:

It placed Labour’s David Skaith on 41 points, ahead of the Conservatives’ Keane Duncan on 27 points, among voters who had made up their mind on who to vote for.

Polling indicates that Labour could have a lead as large as 14 points over the Conservatives in the York and North Yorkshire mayoral race.

But most of the MPs with constituencies covered by the mayoralty are Tories, and they include Rishi Sunak .

This is a new mayoralty, which means it is hard to say who should be favourite because there are no past results to look at. It comprises two council areas: York City, where there is a strong Lib Dem and Labour vote; and North Yorkshire, which is predominantly Tory.

And the Yorkshire Post has published the result of a poll commissioned by Labour Together, a Labour campaign group, suggesting that Labour is on course for a clear victory over the Tories in the York and North Yorkshire mayoral contest.

We've used MRP to call 16 key local authority battlegrounds at the coming local elections - we predict significant Tory losses to Labour You can see our calls in the chart below, and read more detailed analysis from @PME_Politics here: https://t.co/BpN5k8XcOJ pic.twitter.com/cKZywoi7GC

YouGov has used MRP polling to try to predict the results for particular councils. It says the Conservatives face significant losses.

Susan Hall , the Tory candidate for London mayor, has joined a Facebook group which contains Islamophobic hate speech and abusive comments about her opponent Sadiq Khan , the day after an exposé about its contents. Helena Horton has the story.

There are two statements afte PMQs in the Commons: Tom Pursglove on migration, and Kemi Badenoch with a “business and trade facts and figures update” (which sounds like boasting about trade deals, perhaps with reference to this story ).

Badenoch is widely seen as having ambitions to replace Sunak as Conservative leader. But, unlike some of his rivals, she seems to have no interest in Sunak being replaced before the election. Earlier this year it was reported that she had been heard saying “Rishi has got to own the defeat”.

But an MP told i : “I was approached by part of their team last week – they were sounding me out. I told them where to go.” The need for the rebels to proactively recruit more allies “doesn’t denote strength”, the backbencher added.

Many loyalists remain sceptical that there will be enough rebels to put the prime minister’s position in serious danger, regardless of the results.

Badenoch may be correct, at least about Sunak’s position. Polling suggesting that the Conservatives might win the mayoral contests in the West Midlands and in Tees Valley have steadied Tory nerves a little, and yesterday, in a story in the i , Hugo Gye reported that “Conservative rebels who are plotting to overthrow Rishi Sunak have been rebuffed by MPs they have tried to recruit for their proposed coup.” Gye said:

Asked whether this would be the case regardless of the outcome of the elections, she said: “I think that is right.” She claimed she was expecting “a good result”.

I think there’s a lot of noise being made by people who want to get attention but the prime minister has the full backing of the cabinet, he has my full backing.

Kemi Badenoch , the business secretary, was doing a fairly extensive media round this morning. In her appearance on Sky News, she rejected claims that Rishi Sunak might be under threat because of the Tory performance in the local elections. When this suggestion was put to her, she replied:

A £760m equal pay liability bill at Birmingham city council, which led it to effectively declare bankruptcy and make a swathe of drastic budget cuts, could be hugely overstated, councillors, researchers and whistleblowers have said. Jessica Murray has the story.

This is obviously a terrible thing but the school though they were following a guidance because they had used some policy analysis that was by an organisation that wasn’t looking at the equality law.

If I were to give an example of a school that had gender-neutral toilets and young girls there didn’t want to use the same toilets as boys so they weren’t going to the toilet at school and got urinary tract infections.

In an interview with LBC, asked to give an example of bad guidance on this topic, Badenoch cited toilets in schools. She said there was a difference between gender neutral toilets (“when you have urinals, and stalls and cubicles all in the same place, genitalia from opposite sexes might be visible”) and unisex toilets (“like a disabled toilet, everybody has their private cubicle”). And she said gender neutral toilets could be bad for girls.

In some cases organisations believe they are required to allow self-identifying transgender people to access these services. Now, as part of raising awareness and to understand how well single-sex spaces are maintained, Kemi Badenoch is calling on the public to submit their examples to the government.

Where certain conditions are met, businesses and other organisations can legally provide single and separate-sex services such as toilets, changing rooms, and female-only fitness classes, which exclude transgender people of the opposite biological sex who do not have a Gender Recognition Certificate (GRC). Where it is justified, they are also able to exclude transgender people with GRCs.

In a news release the Government Equalities Office explained the need for the initiative in these terms.

So I am asking people to submit real-world examples of organisations using incorrect guidance, so that our policymaking continues to tackle any confusion and we ensure single-sex spaces are maintained.

Single-sex spaces are essential for ensuring privacy and dignity for women. I do recognise, however, that the law in this area is complex, and I know that some organisations are confused and afraid of backlash if they are seen to get it wrong.

Kemi Badenoch , who is minister for women and equalities as well as business and trade secretary, is launching a move to root out “bad guidance” on access to single-sex spaces . The initiative seems intended to restrict the extent to which trans women use these facilities.

Nigel Railton, the ex-chief executive of the former national lottery operator Camelot, has been named as the new interim chair of the Post Office . Jack Simpson has the story.

Don’t be conned by this new government spin on the Rwanda deal. This African man, who did not even cross the Channel, was refused asylum and has voluntarily accepted £3,000 + free board. It won’t stop the boats.

Don't be conned by this new government spin on the Rwanda deal. This African man, who did not even cross the Channel, was refused asylum and has voluntarily accepted £3,000 + free board. It won't stop the boats. https://t.co/UbxT0I8mHh

Nigel Farage, honorary president (and owner ) of Reform UK, and the former leader of Ukip and the Brexit party, has dismissed the story about an asylum seeker flying voluntarily to Rwanda as part of a presentational con.

1 May 2024 09.36 BST Badenoch rejects claim that voluntarily flying migrant to Rwanda just ‘extortionate pre-election gimmick

Good morning. When the safety of Rwanda (asylum and immigration) bill was in the House of Lords before Easter, a mysterious delay crept in. There was plenty of time to get it passed before the Easter recess, but the government held it back, without giving a good reason, and even when parliament returned, the government did not make passing the law a matter of urgency. It only cleared parliament, and got royal assent, last week.

And now it is fairly clear why. With the bill on the statute book, we are seeing a flurry of Rwanda-related activity from the government – which, by miraculous coincidence, seems to be turning up in the papers just days and hours before people in England vote in the local elections.

Some of this activity is only possible because the Rwanda bill is law. As Rajeev Syal and Severin Carrell report, the Home Office has started detaining people and telling them that they will be sent to Rwanda.

The Sun today has got, what at first glance, seems an even more dramatic story. “Britain has removed the first failed asylum seeker to Rwanda,” it reports. “It is the first time the government has ever relocated a failed asylum seeker to a third country in what ministers are hoping is the first of thousands.”

At second glance, there is rather less to this than the headline implies. This is a voluntary relocation. The asylum seeker, who is described in the Sun as a man of African origin, is being paid £3,000 to fly to Rwanda. The Home Office has for a long time operated a voluntary returns programme, where it pays people to return home if their asylum application has failed, and this scheme, announced in March, is a variant of that policy, sending people to Rwanda instead. The government did not need the Safety of Rwanda Act to allow this, and it could have been done long before this week.

The opposition parties have described the news as an election gimmick. In a statement Yvette Cooper, the shadow home secretary, said:

The Tories are so desperate to get any flight off to Rwanda before the local elections that they have now just paid someone to go. British taxpayers aren’t just forking out £3,000 for a volunteer to board a plane, they are also paying Rwanda to provide him with free board and lodgings for the next five years. This extortionate pre-election gimmick is likely to be costing on average £2m per person. Former Tory Home Office ministers warned that the government’s plan was just to get token flights off before a general election. Now we know what they mean.

And Alistair Carmichael, the Liberal Democrats’ home affairs spokesperson, said:

This is cynical nonsense from a Conservative party that is about to take a drubbing at the local elections. Paying someone to go to Rwanda highlights just how much of a gimmick and farce their plan is.

But Kemi Badenoch, the business and trade secretary, welcomed the development this morning. In an interview with LBC, she said it disproved the “myth” that Rwanda is not a safe country. She said:

This is somebody who has actually volunteered to go to Rwanda, which puts to bed this nonsensical myth that Rwanda was not a safe place. It is. People go on holiday there. I know somebody who’s having a very lovely gap year there. We need to move past a lot of those myths, which are actually just disparaging about an African country. This scheme was set up as a deterrence. It is working. Somebody has volunteered to go. Obviously, the easiest cases will be the first but there will be many more. And if you look at what the Irish government has been saying recently, it looks like it is already working. They’re complaining that they’re getting people, failed asylum seekers, coming over there because they didn’t want to go to Rwanda.

And when it was put to her that paying the person to go voluntarily to Rwanda, and then paying for his accommodation , was expensive, she replied:

There is no cost free option, that is the truth of it. It’s better this way than for him to be in the UK, either claiming benefits or being entitled to things that other people in this country can’t have, which be much more expensive for the taxpayer. But there is no free way to police our borders.

Here is the agenda for the day.

12pm: Rishi Sunak faces Keir Starmer at PMQs.

2.50pm: MSPs debate a motion of no confidence in the Scottish government. The debate will run for half an hour.

Afternoon: Starmer is on a visit in Essex.

If you want to contact me, do use the “send us a message” feature. You’ll see it just below the byline – on the left of the screen, if you are reading on a laptop or a desktop. This is for people who want to message me directly. I find it very useful when people message to point out errors (even typos – no mistake is too small to correct). Often I find your questions very interesting, too. I can’t promise to reply to them all, but I will try to reply to as many as I can, either in the comments below the line; privately (if you leave an email address and that seems more appropriate); or in the main blog, if I think it is a topic of wide interest.