I’m not ashamed to say that I shed a tear when the referendum result was called.

My heart is broken, and I’m profoundly disappointed and saddened.

This wasn’t a political game for me, or for my people. The voice to parliament was an offer of reconciliation that was deeply personal – which made the so-called “debates” and “discussions” around the voice personal too.

My white mates kept telling me how shocked they were by the racism that was stirred up by the referendum discussions. But my black mates didn’t. All that racism came as no surprise to us because we live with it every day. That so many white people finally saw it, and acknowledged it, and were horrified by it, is one of the few positives to emerge from this damaging process.

The referendum did not divide this country: it exposed it.

And that exposed racism and ignorance must be addressed urgently and in a bipartisan way by political leaders at all levels. Surely they can agree on that, if nothing else.

However, amid the setbacks, there are individuals and communities that deserve our commendation and gratitude for their tireless efforts in advocating for First Nations constitutional recognition and an enshrined voice to parliament. I would like to sincerely thank our prime minister, Anthony Albanese, and his government, for their commitment to this cause.

Although disheartened, my belief in a brighter future remains unwavering

To all the staunch First Nations and non-First Nations leaders, individuals, and communities across our country who dedicated countless hours of hard work, I acknowledge and sincerely thank you. Your unwavering solidarity and insights have been instrumental in bringing us to this point in our country’s history.

While the outcome may not have aligned with our expectations, we must remember that First Nations peoples remain a severely disadvantaged population. Despite the efforts of successive governments, the enormous social, health and wellbeing disadvantage that afflicts our people and communities remains unbridged.

It is disheartening that lies, misinformation, and disinformation of the voice to parliament by the no campaign have overshadowed that truth. And worse, that First Nations peoples became collateral damage in a referendum that became an unnecessary game of political brinkmanship.

And yet despite this setback, hope still burns brightly. State-based treaty processes are already under way in Queensland, Victoria, and Western Australia. Discussions surrounding treaty proposals in South Australia and the Northern Territory are gaining momentum.

The day Australia voted no: politics with Amy Remeikis – video

The truth-telling component of the treaty process is crucial in shedding light on the historical systemic policies and legislation that have entrapped First Nations peoples in cycles of welfare dependency, a direct consequence of colonisation. It is only through the exposure of these truths that Australians will gain a comprehensive understanding of why mechanisms like the voice to parliament are vital in bridging the divide that perpetuates First Nations disadvantage.

The referendum campaign has also given voice to numerous First Nations leaders across various sectors who, under different circumstances, may not have had such an opportunity. It is imperative that we continue to mentor and nurture these emerging leaders as they represent the next wave of First Nations leadership. Their voices, along with those of others, must be amplified to drive positive change.

In solidarity, I pledge to continue advocating for improved conditions for my people and to work alongside my fellow Australians in our relentless pursuit of positive change. Although disheartened, my belief in a brighter future remains unwavering.

Together, we have the power to transcend divisions and create a nation that upholds the principles of justice, equality, and unity for all. Let this setback serve as fuel for our unwavering determination to build a better Australia – one that honours the First Nations peoples and ensures their rightful place in the tapestry of our nation’s story. We have hope and perseverance.