SNP accuses Labour of trying to face both ways on getting rid of two-child benefit cap

Mish Rahman says is it matter of 'serious concern' he was blocked from being Labour candidate over how he voted on NEC

First asylum seekers to be housed on Bibby Stockholm barge later this month, No 10 says

Home Office will not use illegal migration bill powers to detain refugees until Rwanda court case over, No 10 says

No 10 refuses to deny publication of trans advice for schools held up by row about how strict it should be

Labour MP Stella Creasy urges Starmer to get rid of two-child benefit cap on grounds this would save, not cost, money

Burnham urges Starmer to say axing two-child benefit cap would be 'at front of queue' when resources allow

Starmer thanks Blair for his support as he addresses conference run by former PM's thinktank

Starmer says, unlike Blair, he believes that only progressives can answer the challenges of future

Starmer says Labour will need to be 'even tougher, even more focused, even more disciplined' as election approaches

Left to right: Steve Rotheram, Tracy Brabin and Andy Burnham at the Convention of the North in January.

“They include proposals which, across the network as a whole, would see more staff on concourses and ticket halls to help passengers than there are today, helping with a whole range of needs, from buying tickets to journey planning and helping with accessibility needs.”

A spokesperson for the RDG said: “All train operators are complying with the consultation process as set out in the ticketing and settlement agreement.

The mayors intend to send a pre-action protocol letter to operators in their areas, setting out why they believe closing ticket offices in this way is unlawful.

“For instance, it requires a 12-week consultation. Of course that is nothing like what is being currently undertaken by the train operating companies.”

He went on: “Section 29 of the Railways Act 2005 sets out a very clear and detailed process which must be followed if a train operating company proposes to close a station or any part of a station. That process has simply not been followed in this instance.

Burnham said the “rushed” consultation “does not provide a legal basis” for closing ticket offices, meaning it “should be declared null and void”.

The other mayors involved are: Tracy Brabin of West Yorkshire, Steve Rotheram of Liverpool city region, Oliver Coppard of South Yorkshire and Dr Nik Johnson of Cambridgeshire and Peterborough.

“We’re very worried that these plans are being railroaded through. Today we are confirming that as five mayors representing millions of people across England, we are fighting back.”

But Burnham said: “These closures will affect over 2,000 jobs. It’s just not the case that this is about redeploying staff. This will be a serious reduction in the level of support available to people when they are travelling. It will further erode what remains of trust in travelling on our trains and we think it is the wrong move at the wrong time.

The industry body the Rail Delivery Group (RDG) insisted ticket office staff would be moved on to station platforms and concourses to “modernise customer service”.

Train operators unveiled proposals earlier this month to close nearly all station ticket offices in England after the transport secretary, Mark Harper, urged them to cut costs.

The Greater Manchester mayor, Andy Burnham , who is one of those involved, declared “we will fight this all the way” as he launched a bid to prevent the action.

Five Labour metro mayors are preparing to take legal action in a bid to stop the “rushed” planned mass closure of railway station ticket offices, PA Media reports. PA says:

The vital signs of Labour party democracy are flashing red. It is simply indefensible that a member of Labour’s own executive can be blocked from standing for selection for a free vote on the NEC despite previously being entrusted with overseeing MP selections elsewhere.

Momentum , the leftwing Labour group, has condemned the decision to exclude Rahman from the selection contest. A Momentum spokesperson said:

I have not made the longlist in the Wolverhampton West parliamentary selection despite the backing of seven trade unions and affiliates. I have chaired longlisting panels for other Parliamentary selections but deemed not a 'high quality candidate' to be longlisted myself. pic.twitter.com/0PPufZQvkz

I was blocked for how I voted on the NEC in relation to the composition of party disciplinary structures, following the EHRC report. This was a position shared by an array of NEC members, including trade union representatives. Being blocked for casting a vote in a democratic process should be a serious concern for all of us in the Labour party.

As a two-term, currently elected member of Labour’s NEC, I have chaired panels for longlisting in other parliamentary selections – I am therefore allowed to longlist candidates but not to be longlisted myself.

He says it is a matter of “serious concern” that he was blocked because of how he voted on a matter before the national executive committee (NEC). And he says that, even though he has been blocked from being on a longlist himself, as an NEC member he is still choosing who gets included in other longlists. He says:

Mish Rahman has posted the full text of his statement about the decision to block him from the contest to be Labour’s next candidate for Wolverhampton West on Twitter. (See 11.34am .)

In the interview he said he had not ruled out standing as an independent candidate in the next London mayoral election, but he did not elaborate, saying he wanted the interview to focus on child poverty.

Corbyn, who has been suspended from the parliamentary Labour party over his response to the Equality and Human Rights Commission into antisemitism in the party when he was leader, has been banned from standing as a candidate again for the party at the next election.

And it’s the Labour party that ought to be offering that pathway to change and it’s not doing it at the moment.

Even in areas like mine, there are high levels of child poverty – probably 40% of the children in my constituency. All across the north-east, which Jamie [Driscoll] represents – a third of all children across the whole of the region are living in poverty. That has got to go and got to change.

They are seething with anger, particularly as commitments have been made regularly by the party that we would take children out of poverty. Even the Blair government, which Keir Starmer often quotes, did do a great deal to lift children out of poverty by not having a two-child policy …

Corbyn, Starmer’s predecessor as leader, told LBC that he had spoken to “quite a lot of Labour MPs” about this issue. He went on:

Labour MPs are “seething with anger” about Keir Starmer’s decision to say the party would not get rid of the two-child benefit cap, Jeremy Corbyn said this morning.

We were told the party would support us towards leadership positions as black and ethnic minority activists – yet after this longlisting process, nothing has changed.

This is not a shock – it is what I and my team expected.

Rahman is now the third graduate of the Bernie Grant leadership programme - aimed at empowering BAME Labour members to run for office – to be blocked from standing.

The appeal panel accepted that Rahman was not opposed to the EHRC report itself. But Rahman did oppose some party rule changes that were proposed, and discussed at the NEC, as a consequence of the report, and the appeal panel concluded this meant his candidature posed “a risk to the party’s electoral chances”.

After he was blocked last week, Rahman used the party’s new selections appeal process, but his appeal was not upheld.

Rahman, one of the few leftwingers left on the national executive committee, had won the backing of seven trade unions and affiliated societies, which would normally have seen him automatically longlisted. But officials said he was being blocked because of his response to the Equality and Human Rights Commission’s report into Labour and antisemitism.

Mish Rahman , a notable Muslim voice within the party and graduate of the inaugural Bernie Grant leadership programme, has been blocked from the longlist for the new Wolverhampton West seat.

More than 28,000 people in England and Wales have been convicted of breaches of Covid-19 regulations, despite the government’s insistence that it never intended to criminalise people for minor infractions during the pandemic, Maeve McClenaghan reports.

Asked if he was saying that Sarwar was not being sincere when he said he opposed the cap, Flynn said there was a “big difference” between campaigning against something and getting rid of it while in power.

The reality is that London Labour have given a diktat to the Scottish Labour leader that he needs to support their ridiculous and heinous position in relation to this policy and Anas Sarwar has followed suit.

Anas Sarwar appears to be rubbing some Brasso on his neck this morning, because he is trying to con the people of Scotland into believing he is against the policy when just yesterday on the television he was saying he backs Keir Starmer’s position.

Yesterday Anas Sarwar, the Scottish Labour leader, said that he was opposed to the policy, and wanted to see the cap removed as quickly as possible, but that he acceped that Keir Starmer could not afford to do everything he wanted to immediately. Lucy Powell, the shadow culture secretary, made a similar argument this morning (see 10.21am ), insisting the two positions were not inconsistent.

The SNP has accused the Scottish Labour party of trying to face both ways at the same time on the two-child benefit cap.

At Westminster the general assumption is that the Conservatives will lose all three seats – and that the chances of them winning all three are about as slim as the chances of Scotland winning the next World Cup.

But it’s also possible that we might win all three. I’m an optimist, I’m a Scottish Conservative and Scotland football fan – I have to be an optimist.

One of the curiosities of political journalism is that, when a politician says something blindingly obvious, it can sometimes count as news. Andrew Bowie , an energy minister, was in that category this morning when he was asked on Times Radio about the three byelection on Thursday, where the Conservative party is defending majorities of 20,137 (Selby and Ainsty), 19,213 (Somerton and Frome) and 7,210 (Uxbridge and South Ruislip).

There are lots of bad policies … we’re not implementing them, it’s about not reversing [them].

Both can be true at the same time, that things can be a bad policy, they can be bad politics, but the economic reality is what we’re now faced with.

When it was put to her that Jonathan Ashworth, the shadow work and pensions secretary, has described the cap as “heinous”, she replied:

As a famous phrase would go, there is no money left, the government has absolutely tanked the economy.

We’ve opposed this policy, this is not a good policy. We’ve opposed it for many years through parliament, but we’re now in a very different economic situation.

Starmer’s comments caused alarm within his party because he went further than other shadow ministers, like Rachel Reeves , who have left open the possibility that a Labour government might abolish the cap.

Keir Starmer triggered a row on this issue on Sunday when he suggested the party was committed to keeping the two-child benefit cap – a policy which has been widely criticised for forcing families into poverty, while failing to have the behavioural impact ministers expected when it was introduced.

She even defended the position by saying “there is no money left” – a line used in a joke note left by a Labour Treasury minister for his successor in 2010 which has been used endlessly by the Tories ever since as supposed proof of Labour’s economic irresponsibility.

In an interview with Sky News this morning, she claimed that there was no contradiction between viewing the policy as a bad one, and accepting it would have to stay until money could be found to reverse it.

Lucy Powell , the shadow culture secretary, has played down claims that Labour is split over whether or not to reverse the two-child benefit cap .

A barge that will be used to house 500 asylum seekers has belatedly arrived at Portland, Dorset, after voting in the House of Lords paved the way for the government’s illegal migration bill to become law, Ben Quinn reports.

18 Jul 2023 09.33 BST Met chief says he’s ‘frustrated’ ministers haven’t changed rules to make it easier for rogue officers to be sacked

Good morning. Shortly after midnight the government won the last of five votes in the House of Lords on the illegal migration bill, meaning the amendments to the bill passed by peers last week have been reversed, the bill is now broadly as the government wants it (it accepted some concessions in the early phase of ‘ping pong’) and it is now due to get royal assent, possibly very soon. The full story is here.

Officially, the Lords did not back down. There were five divisions last night, and the government won all of them.

But at least one vote was pulled, after Justin Welby, the archbishop of Canterbury, decided not to put his amendment, saying the government should produce an international strategy for tackling migration, to a vote.

And some of the peers who voted against the government on this bill in earlier divisions were not in the voting lobbies last night. In votes on this bill earlier this month there were up to 235 peers voting against the government. Last night the anti-goverment vote was never higher than 200, and the Tories won with a higher-than-usual turnout of Tory peers although their majority was only seven on one vote. The opposition went down fighting, but the numbers imply they weren’t trying as hard as in the past – which is normal in a chamber where it is accepted that ultimately the elected house has to have its way.

All this is very good news for the Home Office. But there was less good news for them on the Today programme this morning when Sir Mark Rowley, the commissioner of the Metropolitan police, gave them a kicking over their failure to change rules that make it very hard for him to sack rogue officers.

Rowley has been complaining about this ever since his appointment. Here is a story from November last year, and in January he went futher, saying the regulations were “crazy”. Ministers said they would do something about this. But still nothing has happened, and Rowley said he was “frustrated” about the lack of action. He said:

The government announced a review that was, I think, due to report in May to look at police regulations and making the sort of changes I’d asked for. We haven’t yet heard the results of that review, and I’m frustrated. I need those changes in regulations to help me get on with them because some of the processes are too long, too bureaucratic. And some of the decisions are made outside the Met. So people we’ve decided shouldn’t be police officers – an independent lawyer says, ‘Well, bad luck, you’ve got to keep them.’ That can’t be right. No other employer that has to deal with that. If I’m trying to get the minority out the organisation, whilst helping the majority of my people succeed, it’s not helpful to have useless, slow bureaucratic processes.

Asked why the government was taking so long to respond, Rowley replied:

I don’t know. There are legal technicalities and I’m sure there’s lots of reasons for them to work through. But I’m in a man in a hurry. We’re an organisation in a hurry to build the trust of Londoners and I’d like that support as quickly as possible.

Rowley also claimed that leaders in other organisations did not face the same constraints.

Why are we pretty much the only organisation where the leaders aren’t able to decide whether people stay in the organisation or no …. You’re robustly challenging me on the culture of the Met and our ability to build trust in communities. It seems a little perverse, doesn’t it, that I don’t get to decide who works here. That’s a bit weird, and I don’t think anybody else works in an organisation where that’s the case.

Rowley was being interviewed because today the Met is announcing its New Met for London plan. Vikram Dodd has more on that here.

Here is the agenda for the day.

Morning: Rishi Sunak chairs cabinet.

11am: Grant Shapps, the energy secretary, gives a speech at the launch of Great British Nuclear.

11.30am: Downing Street holds a lobby briefing.

12.30pm: Ben Wallace, the defence secretary, gives a statement to MPs about his defence command paper.

2.30pm: Tim Davie, the BBC director general, gives evidence to the Lords communications committee.

4.15pm: Keir Starmer gives a speech at the Future of Britain conference organised by the Tony Blair Institute. Afterwards he will take part in a Q&A with Blair himself.

If you want to contact me, do try the “send us a message” feature. You’ll see it just below the byline – on the left of the screen, if you are reading on a PC or a laptop. This is for people who want to message me directly. I find it very useful when people message to point out errors (even typos – no mistake is too small to correct). Often I find your questions very interesting too. I can’t promise to reply to them all, but I will try to reply to as many as I can, either in the comments below the line, privately (if you leave an email address and that seems more appropriate), or in the main blog, if I think it is a topic of wide interest.