Hi, it’s Riley in Washington, where the US presidential race is dominating headlines. I want to tell you about how the fentanyl crisis is playing out in swing states, which are likely to decide the election, but first...

Today's must-reads

Doctors have successfully transplanted a genetically edited pig kidney into a man with end-stage disease.

The first brain implant patient for Elon Musk’s Neuralink can now play video games and online chess using his mind.

Ozempic users are now paying up for help ditching the pricey medicine.

The politics of fentanyl

In Tempe, Arizona, the recent impact of the opioid crisis is plain to see. Wastewater surveillance shows pervasive fentanyl use across the city, which is located just east of Phoenix. Emergency medical services receive roughly two calls a day related to opioids. And local law enforcement have helped seize millions of fentanyl-laced pills.

Arizona, like many states across the US, saw an increase in fatal overdoses from synthetic opioids like fentanyl in the 12-month period through October. The toll is staggering – contributing to an overarching 270,000 reported deaths in the US driven by fentanyl since just before the Covid pandemic began.

South of Tempe in Tucson, Theresa Guerrero is calling for an end to this lethal chapter of the opioid epidemic. “Our kids are not overdosing,” said Guerrero, who lost her 31-year-old son, Jacob, to a fentanyl overdose. “They’re being poisoned.”

She is one of many voters in US swing states who’ve seen their politics change because of the devastation caused by fentanyl. “Now I think differently because of what happened to my son,” Guerrero said. “Whoever is going to work to shut the border, I want them to be leading the country.”

As the hotly contested US presidential election approaches, 8 in 10 swing-state voters say that fentanyl misuse is a “very important” or “somewhat important” issue when deciding who to vote for in November — more than the number who cite abortion, climate change, labor and unions, or the wars in Ukraine and Gaza, according to a Bloomberg News/Morning Consult poll. The voters were most likely to hold drug users and Mexican cartels responsible for the epidemic.

Presidential candidates Joe Biden and Donald Trump are seizing on the issue to firm up support from party faithful and woo voters whose allegiances may have shifted due to the crisis. On the campaign trail, fentanyl has become a way to talk about everything from immigration and border security to China and crime.

But there are clear partisan divides on how the crisis should be addressed. Democrats were more likely than Republicans to want to see the US make overdose antidotes more available and provide treatment for opioid-use disorder. Republicans, meanwhile, wanted to increase security at the US-Mexico border and limit migration. That’s despite the fact that some 90% of all intercepted fentanyl is stopped at US ports of entry, primarily in vehicles driven by American citizens.

Seeing politicians conflate the fentanyl crisis with issues surrounding immigration and the border isn’t surprising to Lane Santa Cruz, a Democrat on the Tucson City Council. “We see that time and time again with the war on drugs and the oversimplification of how drugs get to the US,” she said.

Cruz ran for office in part because she wanted to protect young people in her community after she lost her brother to a fentanyl overdose in 2016. She says turning fentanyl into a border issue is a fear tactic. “Blaming things on the border doesn’t address the root cause of why demand for drugs exists,” she said.—Riley Griffin

The big story

Even in states far from the US-Mexico border, it seems everyone “knows someone who’s been impacted by a fentanyl overdose,” as one New Hampshire Republican says. In their Big Take, Riley, Tanaz Meghjani, and Katia Dmitrieva further explore voter opinions on what steps should be taken and what Congress and the Biden administration are doing in response.

What we’re reading

DNA tests are uncovering the true prevalence of incest, the Atlantic reports.

US life expectancy rebounded in 2022, but Covid-19 and drug overdoses were still deadly, NPR reports.

In the latest report in its War on Recovery series, Stat looks at how methadone clinics backed by private equity are fighting calls for reform.

Ask Prognosis

Ask us anything — well, anything health-related that is! Each week we’re picking a reader question and putting it to our network of experts. So get in touch via AskPrognosis@bloomberg.net.