Bloomberg’s New Economy Forum returns to Singapore Nov. 8-10 as the world’s most influential leaders gather to address critical issues facing the global economy. This year’s theme, “Embracing Instability,” focuses on underlying economic issues such as persistent inflation, geopolitical tensions, the rise of AI and the climate crisis. See what’s coming here.

Good morning, I’m Erik Schatzker, editorial director of Bloomberg New Economy, back in Singapore for the upcoming sixth annual New Economy Forum.

We’re bringing together some 450 leaders from across the region and around the world for a series of discussions that bridge the divides between East and West (as well as between the Global North and Global South). What makes 2023 different is fortuitous timing.

On Friday, China confirmed that Vice President Han Zheng will attend the Forum in person and deliver an opening-day address. Coming only days before the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation summit in San Francisco, he’ll almost certainly give a sense of what to expect from the critical meeting on the sidelines between US President Joe Biden and China President Xi Jinping.

Even as the US and China double down on export and capital restrictions and joust over the future of Taiwan, both governments are gradually resuming dialogues on a range of issues, including nuclear arms control, maritime affairs and Israel’s war with Hamas. As US Treasury Secretary Janet Yellen described it last month, there’s now a re-engagement following a “dangerous” period of almost no senior-level talks.

Expand Han Zheng Photographer: Jeenah Moon/Bloomberg

This week in the New Economy

Global economic fragmentation is benefiting “connector” economies.

India’s economy gets a boost from festive-season consumption binge.

Xi signals he’s worried about China’s shrinking population.

Israel’s economy gets a Covid-like shock from the war with Hamas.

Colombia speeds effort to recover billions of dollars of sunken treasure.

Xi, barring any last-minute change, is heading to APEC and to his first tête-à-tête with Biden since the two met in Indonesia last year on the sidelines of the Group of 20 summit. The sit-down would follow a series of Xi engagements with prominent US leaders, including California Governor Gavin Newsom, whom he met in Beijing last month to discuss action on climate change.

“This is another tentative but encouraging sign of re-engagement,” said James Crabtree, an author and expert on Asian security who until recently was executive director at the International Institute for Strategic Studies in Singapore. “Beijing needs to persuade investors that its economic difficulties are temporary and foreign capital remains welcome in China.”

In addition to Han, Chinese participation at the Forum will include:

Envision Group Founder Zhang Lei, one of the world’s leading renewable-energy developers

Kai-Fu Lee, chief executive of Sinovation Ventures and author of AI Superpowers

Benjamin Deng, chief investment officer of the insurance giant Ping An Group

Fred Hu, founder and CEO of private-equity firm Primavera Capital and former China chairman of Goldman Sachs Group Inc.

Jane Sun, CEO of Trip.com Group

Li Zhen, founder and chairman of battery developer Gotion High-Tech

With representation spanning services to tech to the investing world, the Forum will offer a broad snapshot of how major figures are seeing the state of China’s economic rebound. The discussions also come just weeks before China’s top leaders will gather to set the nation’s 2024 growth target—after the “about 5%” goal for 2023 lookedtouch-and-go.

At the inaugural New Economy Forum in 2018, held at the height of the US-China trade war, former Treasury Secretary Hank Paulson warned of an “economic iron curtain” dividing the world if both countries failed to resolve their strategic differences. It was a prescient statement.

The US, under both the Trump and Biden administrations, has since imposed a range of sanctions on Chinese companies and officials over security concerns, human rights, efforts to undermine democracy in Hong Kong and support for Russia’s war on Ukraine.

Most recently, Washington banned exports of advanced chips and related equipment to China and throttled the flow of US funds to companies working on technology for the Chinese military.

While the global economy hasn’t yet cleaved into two blocs, many Western companies are actively looking for ways to manufacture or source materials in countries other than China.

In part, that’s because they need to build in more supply-chain resiliency after the Covid-19 pandemic. But it also reflects a growing desire to “de-risk” exposure to China amid concerns over espionage, data privacy and even detention by Chinese authorities.

Another sign of fracturing: venture-capital firms Sequoia Capital and GGV Capital are splitting off their Chinese investing arms into separate entities.

Obviously, there’s no way the New Economy Forum can bridge all those divides. But by creating a platform for engagement and focusing the conversation around such topics as economic statecraft, globalization and the hard truths of AI, it might make a difference.