There are a handful of tell-tale signs a school is facing stress. Rider University, a landmark in central New Jersey for the past 158 years, has been grappling with most of them.

The school is losing money. Over the past decade, it has lost about a fifth of its student body. And this month, the outlook for its credit rating, already below investment grade, was cut to negative.

Gregory Dell’Omo, Rider’s president, has been working hard to stabilize the university’s finances. He’s laid off staff, cut programs, even put a crown jewel, the school’s Princeton campus, on the auction block. He’s optimistic as this year’s enrollment figures have shown early signs of growth. But he’s under no illusions. The economic and demographic forces stacked against small colleges — soaring costs and a dwindling pool of applicants — are altering the American higher-education landscape before his eyes.

NY PA NJ Trenton DE Franklin F. Moore Library Dorms RIDER UNIVERSITY NY PA NJ Trenton Area of detail DE Franklin F. Moore Library Dorms RIDER UNIVERSITY

“We’re all vying for a shrinking pool,” Dell’Omo said in an interview on Rider’s main campus, just outside of Trenton. “We live and die by demographics.’’

The school is one of about 170 small, nonprofit colleges and universities that met three or more of the five metrics Bloomberg News used to identify increasing pressures on higher-ed institutions through 2021. That number marked the highest point in at least 15 years and was more than five times the amount a decade earlier, according to Bloomberg’s review of over 100,000 data points from about 1,000 US schools with fewer than 5,000 students.

The period of analysis — which runs through 2021, the most recent year with a comprehensive dataset available — captures a particularly challenging time for schools. The outbreak of Covid-19 forced many students to pause or delay their educational plans. Still, the trends captured in the data started years before the pandemic hit and some analysts say they aren’t changing any time soon.

Methodology Bloomberg News consulted six experts on a system to measure growing operational stress in higher-education institutions. After months of reporting, the five factors that emerged were a high acceptance rate, a low yield on offers of admission, falling enrollment, rising institutional aid and persistent operating losses. Meeting these criteria does not necessarily indicate financial distress, but schools that meet more of the factors face greater challenges and will likely have a harder time investing in themselves, the experts said. Bloomberg’s analysis used data collected by the National Center for Education Statistics through 2021 — the most recent year with a comprehensive dataset available.

A THREE-YEAR AVERAGE YIELD RATE BELOW 20% DECLINING ENROLLMENT A THREE-YEAR AVERAGE ACCEPTANCE RATE OVER 80% Three straight years of falling full-time students, losing at least 10%. The share of students who accept offers of admission. The share of applicants a school admits. PERSISTENT OPERATING LOSSES RISING INSTITUTIONAL AID RISING INSTITUTIONAL AID Three consecutive years of operating losses, excluding gains or losses from investments or endowments. Three straight years of increased school aid to students, rising at least 10%. Three straight years of increased school aid to students, rising at least 10% A THREE-YEAR AVERAGE YIELD RATE BELOW 20% A THREE-YEAR AVERAGE ACCEPTANCE RATE OVER 80% The share of students who accept offers of admission. The share of applicants a school admits. RISING INSTITUTIONAL AID DECLINING ENROLLMENT Three straight years of increased school aid to students, rising at least 10%. Three straight years of falling full-time students, losing at least 10%. PERSISTENT OPERATING LOSSES Three consecutive years of operating losses, excluding gains or losses from investments or endowments. Three consecutive years of operating losses, excluding gains or losses from investments or endowments. A THREE-YEAR AVERAGE YIELD RATE BELOW 20% A THREE-YEAR AVERAGE ACCEPTANCE RATE OVER 80% The share of students who accept offers of admission. The share of applicants a school admits. RISING INSTITUTIONAL AID DECLINING ENROLLMENT Three straight years of increased school aid to students, rising at least 10%. Three straight years of falling full-time students, losing at least 10%. PERSISTENT OPERATING LOSSES Three consecutive years of operating losses, excluding gains or losses from investments or endowments.

Higher Ed Has Seen Pressure Rise Number of small schools with

Number of small schools with no stress signal

no stress signal at least 1

at least 1 2

2 3

3 4

4 5

5 closed or merged 1,000 schools A total of at least 46 schools closed from 2008 to 2021 800 600 400 200 0 2008 2012 2016 2020 A total of at least 46 schools closed from 2008 to 2021 1,000 schools In 2008, 1% of the schools had at least three, four or five stress signals. In 2021, 18% did. 800 600 400 In 2008, 44% of the schools had no stress signal. In 2021, only 20% did not. 200 0 2008 2012 2016 2020 A total of at least 46 schools closed from 2008 to 2021 In 2008, 1% of the schools had at least three, four or five stress signals. In 2021, 18% did. 1,000 schools 800 600 400 200 In 2008, 44% of the schools had no stress signal. In 2021, only 20% did not. 0 2008 2012 2016 2020 Note: Closures and mergers reflect instances of closure, merger or suspension of operations in the period from 2008 to 2021. Some merged schools still reported students. Sources: Bloomberg analysis of 973 small, nonprofit four-year colleges; National Center for Education Statistics.

Experts have long said small colleges would bear the brunt of a massive shift in demographics that will see fewer high-school graduates flood into college campuses. It’s a change that’s forcing schools – especially less prestigious ones — to rethink the economics of higher education.

Some schools have pushed back on Bloomberg’s analysis, saying it relies on years that are outliers in the higher-ed landscape. There is a roughly two-year lag in data that the federal government publishes on higher-education institutions. Several schools have noted headcount, for example, has shown improvement since 2021. Still, longer-term forecasts suggest pressures on enrollment will continue. And while government aid during the pandemic helped put a Band-Aid on the long-simmering issue of dwindling enrollments, the expiration of relief next year is likely to expose that a reckoning is already playing out at dozens of colleges.

More Schools Met Stress Flags In 2021 Search for a school ✖ Abilene Christian University, TX Abraham Baldwin Agricultural College, GA Adams State University, CO Adrian College, MI AdventHealth University, FL Agnes Scott College, GA AIB College of Business, IA Alabama State University, AL Alaska Pacific University, AK Albany College of Pharmacy and Health Sciences, NY Albertus Magnus College, CT Albion College, MI Albright College, PA Alcorn State University, MS Alderson Broaddus University, WV Alfred University, NY Alice Lloyd College, KY Allegheny College, PA Allen College, IA Allen University, SC Alma College, MI Alvernia University, PA Alverno College, WI American International College, MA American Musical and Dramatic Academy, NY Amherst College, MA Anderson University, IN Anderson University, SC Anna Maria College, MA Aquinas College, MI Aquinas College, TN Arcadia University, PA Arizona Christian University, AZ Arizona State University-West, AZ Art Center College of Design, CA Asbury University, KY Ashland University Dwight Schar College of Nursing, OH Ashland University, OH Assumption University, MA Augsburg University, MN Augustana College, IL Augustana University, SD Austin College, TX Ave Maria University, FL Averett University, VA Avila University, MO Babson College, MA Baker College, MI Baker University, KS Baldwin Wallace University, OH Baptist Health Sciences University, TN Bard College at Simon's Rock, MA Bard College, NY Barnard College, NY Barnes-Jewish College Goldfarb School of Nursing, MO Barton College, NC Bates College, ME Bay Path University, MA Beacon College, FL Becker College, MA Bellarmine University, KY Bellin College, WI Belmont Abbey College, NC Beloit College, WI Bemidji State University, MN Benedict College, SC Benedictine College, KS Benedictine University, IL Bennington College, VT Berea College, KY Berry College, GA Bethany College, KS Bethany College, WV Bethany Lutheran College, MN Bethany University, CA Bethel College-North Newton, KS Bethel University, IN Bethel University, MN Bethel University, TN Bethune-Cookman University, FL Birmingham-Southern College, AL Black Hills State University, SD Blackburn College, IL Bloomfield College, NJ Blue Mountain College, MS Bluefield State College, WV Bluefield University, VA Bluffton University, OH Bon Secours Memorial College of Nursing, VA Bowdoin College, ME Brenau University, GA Brescia University, KY Brevard College, NC Brewton-Parker College, GA Bridgewater College, VA Brigham Young University-Hawaii, HI Bryan College of Health Sciences, NE Bryant University, RI Bryn Mawr College, PA Bucknell University, PA Buena Vista University, IA Bushnell University, OR Cabarrus College of Health Sciences, NC Cabrini University, PA Cairn University-Langhorne, PA Caldwell University, NJ California College of the Arts, CA California Institute of the Arts, CA California Lutheran University, CA California State University Maritime Academy, CA Calvary University, MO Calvin University, MI Canisius College, NY Capital University, OH Cardinal Stritch University, WI Carleton College, MN Carlow University, PA Carolinas College of Health Sciences, NC Carroll College, MT Carroll University, WI Carson-Newman University, TN Carthage College, WI Castleton University, VT Catawba College, NC Cazenovia College, NY Cedar Crest College, PA Cedarville University, OH Centenary College of Louisiana, LA Centenary University, NJ Centra College, VA Central Baptist College, AR Central Bible College, MO Central College, IA Central Methodist University-College of Graduate and Extended Studies, MO Central Methodist University-College of Liberal Arts and Sciences, MO Central Yeshiva Tomchei Tmimim Lubavitz, NY Centre College, KY Chaminade University of Honolulu, HI Champlain College, VT Charleston Southern University, SC Chatham University, PA Chestnut Hill College, PA Chicago State University, IL Chowan University, NC Christian Brothers University, TN Christopher Newport University, VA Citadel Military College of South Carolina, SC Claflin University, SC Claremont McKenna College, CA Clarion University of Pennsylvania, PA Clark Atlanta University, GA Clark University, MA Clarke University, IA Clarks Summit University, PA Clarkson College, NE Clarkson University, NY Clearwater Christian College, FL Cleary University, MI Cleveland Institute of Art, OH Cleveland Institute of Music, OH Coe College, IA Coker University, SC Colby College, ME Colby-Sawyer College, NH Colgate University, NY College for Creative Studies, MI College of Coastal Georgia, GA College of Mount Saint Vincent, NY College of Our Lady of the Elms, MA College of Saint Benedict, MN College of Saint Mary, NE College of Santa Fe at Albuquerque, NM College of the Atlantic, ME College of the Holy Cross, MA College of the Ozarks, MO Colorado College, CO Columbia College, SC Columbus College of Art and Design, OH Concord University, WV Concordia College at Moorhead, MN Concordia College, NY Concordia University Ann Arbor, MI Concordia University Texas, TX Concordia University-Nebraska, NE Connecticut College, CT Converse University, SC Cooper Union for the Advancement of Science and Art, NY Coppin State University, MD Corban University, OR Corcoran College of Art and Design, DC Cornell College, IA Cornerstone University, MI Cornish College of the Arts, WA Cottey College, MO Covenant College, GA Cox College, MO Crown College, MN Culinary Institute of America, NY Culver-Stockton College, MO Cumberland University, TN CUNY Medgar Evers College, NY Curry College, MA D'Youville College, NY Daemen University, NY Dakota State University, SD Dakota Wesleyan University, SD Dallas Baptist University, TX Dallas Christian College, TX Dana College, NE Davidson College, NC Davis & Elkins College, WV Dean College, MA Defiance College, OH Delaware Valley University, PA Delta State University, MS Denison University, OH DePauw University, IN DeSales University, PA Dickinson College, PA Dickinson State University, ND Dillard University, LA Doane University, NE Dominican College of Blauvelt, NY Dominican University of California, CA Dominican University, IL Dordt University, IA Drake University, IA Drew University, NJ Drury University, MO Dunwoody College of Technology, MN Earlham College, IN East Central University, OK East Texas Baptist University, TX Eastern Connecticut State University, CT Eastern Mennonite University, VA Eastern Nazarene College, MA Eastern New Mexico University-Main Campus, NM Eastern Oregon University, OR Eckerd College, FL Edgewood College, WI Edinboro University of Pennsylvania, PA Edward Waters University, FL Elizabeth City State University, NC Elizabethtown College, PA Elmhurst University, IL Elmira College, NY Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University-Prescott, AZ Emmanuel College, GA Emmanuel College, MA Emory & Henry College, VA Endicott College, MA Erskine College, SC Eureka College, IL Evangel University, MO Everglades University, FL Fairleigh Dickinson University-Florham Campus, NJ Fairmont State University, WV Faith Baptist Bible College and Theological Seminary, IA Faulkner University, AL Felician University, NJ Ferrum College, VA Finlandia University, MI Fisher College, MA Fisk University, TN Flagler College, FL Florida College, FL Florida Memorial University, FL Florida Southern College, FL Fontbonne University, MO Fort Lewis College, CO Fort Valley State University, GA Framingham State University, MA Francis Marion University, SC Franciscan Missionaries of Our Lady University, LA Franciscan University of Steubenville, OH Franklin and Marshall College, PA Franklin College, IN Franklin Pierce University, NH Franklin W Olin College of Engineering, MA Freed-Hardeman University, TN Fresno Pacific University, CA Friends University, KS Frostburg State University, MD Furman University, SC Gallaudet University, DC Gannon University, PA Gardner-Webb University, NC Geneva College, PA George Fox University, OR Georgetown College, KY Georgia Southwestern State University, GA Georgian Court University, NJ Gettysburg College, PA Gods Bible School and College, OH Goldey-Beacom College, DE Good Samaritan College of Nursing and Health Science, OH Gordon College, MA Gordon State College, GA Goshen College, IN Goucher College, MD Governors State University, IL Grace Christian University, MI Grace College and Theological Seminary, IN Graceland University-Lamoni, IA Grand View University, IA Green Mountain College, VT Greensboro College, NC Greenville University, IL Grinnell College, IA Grove City College, PA Guilford College, NC Gustavus Adolphus College, MN Gwynedd Mercy University, PA Hallmark University, TX Hamilton College, NY Hamline University, MN Hampden-Sydney College, VA Hampshire College, MA Hampton University, VA Hannibal-LaGrange University, MO Hanover College, IN Hardin-Simmons University, TX Harding University, AR Hartwick College, NY Harvey Mudd College, CA Haskell Indian Nations University, KS Hastings College, NE Haverford College, PA Hawaii Pacific University, HI Heidelberg University, OH Helene Fuld College of Nursing, NY Henderson State University, AR Hendrix College, AR Herzing University-Akron, OH Herzing University-Atlanta, GA Herzing University-Birmingham, AL Herzing University-Madison, WI Herzing University-Minneapolis, MN Herzing University-New Orleans, LA Herzing University-Orlando, FL Hilbert College, NY Hiram College, OH Hobart William Smith Colleges, NY Hollins University, VA Holy Cross College, IN Holy Family College, WI Holy Family University, PA Holy Names University, CA Hood College, MD Hope College, MI Hope International University, CA Houghton College, NY Houston Baptist University, TX Howard Payne University, TX Huntingdon College, AL Huntington University, IN Husson University, ME Huston-Tillotson University, TX Illinois College, IL Illinois Wesleyan University, IL Immaculata University, PA Indiana Institute of Technology, IN Indiana University-East, IN Indiana University-Kokomo, IN Indiana University-Northwest, IN Indiana University-South Bend, IN Indiana University-Southeast, IN Indiana Wesleyan University-Marion, IN Institute of American Indian and Alaska Native Culture and Arts Development, NM Iona College, NY Iowa Wesleyan University, IA Jacksonville University, FL Jefferson (Philadelphia University + Thomas Jefferson University), PA John Brown University, AR John Carroll University, OH Johnson & Wales University-Charlotte, NC Johnson & Wales University-Denver, CO Johnson & Wales University-North Miami, FL Johnson C Smith University, NC Johnson University, TN Judson University, IL Juniata College, PA Kalamazoo College, MI Kansas City Art Institute, MO Kansas Wesleyan University, KS Keene State College, NH Kentucky Christian University, KY Kentucky State University, KY Kentucky Wesleyan College, KY Kenyon College, OH Kettering College, OH Kettering University, MI Keuka College, NY Keystone College, PA King University, TN King's College, PA Knox College, IL La Roche University, PA La Salle University, PA La Sierra University, CA Laboure College, MA Lafayette College, PA LaGrange College, GA Laguna College of Art and Design, CA Lake Erie College, OH Lake Forest College, IL Lake Superior State University, MI Lakeland University, WI Lambuth University, TN Lancaster Bible College, PA Lander University, SC Landmark College, VT Lasell University, MA Lawrence Technological University, MI Lawrence University, WI Le Moyne College, NY Le Moyne-Owen College, TN Lebanon Valley College, PA Lee University, TN Lees-McRae College, NC Lenoir-Rhyne University, NC LeTourneau University, TX Lewis & Clark College, OR Lewis-Clark State College, ID Life Pacific University, CA Limestone University, SC Lincoln College, IL Lincoln University, PA Linfield University-McMinnville Campus, OR Lipscomb University, TN Livingstone College, NC Lock Haven University, PA Longwood University, VA Loras College, IA Louisiana College, LA Louisiana State University-Alexandria, LA Lourdes University, OH Loyola University New Orleans, LA Lubbock Christian University, TX Luther College, IA Lycoming College, PA Lyndon State College, VT Lynn University, FL Lyon College, AR Macalester College, MN MacMurray College, IL Madonna University, MI Maine College of Art & Design, ME Maine Maritime Academy, ME Malone University, OH Manchester University, IN Manhattan College, NY Manhattanville College, NY Manor College, PA Mansfield University of Pennsylvania, PA Maranatha Baptist University, WI Maria College of Albany, NY Marian University, IN Marian University, WI Marietta College, OH Mars Hill University, NC Martin Luther College, MN Maryland Institute College of Art, MD Marymount Manhattan College, NY Marymount University, VA Maryville College, TN Marywood University, PA Massachusetts College of Art and Design, MA Massachusetts College of Liberal Arts, MA Massachusetts Maritime Academy, MA Mayville State University, ND McDaniel College, MD McKendree University, IL McMurry University, TX McPherson College, KS Medaille College, NY Menlo College, CA Mercy College of Health Sciences, IA Mercy College of Ohio, OH Mercyhurst University, PA Meredith College, NC Mesivta Torah Vodaath Rabbinical Seminary, NY Messiah University, PA Methodist College, IL Methodist University, NC Metropolitan College of New York, NY Michigan Jewish Institute, MI Mid-Continent University, KY MidAmerica Nazarene University, KS Middle Georgia College, GA Middlebury College, VT Midland University, NE Midway University, KY Milligan College, TN Millikin University, IL Mills College, CA Millsaps College, MS Milwaukee Institute of Art & Design, WI Milwaukee School of Engineering, WI Minneapolis College of Art and Design, MN Minot State University, ND Misericordia University, PA Mississippi College, MS Mississippi University for Women, MS Mississippi Valley State University, MS Missouri Baptist University, MO Missouri Southern State University, MO Missouri Valley College, MO Mitchell College, CT Molloy College, NY Monmouth College, IL Montana Technological University, MT Montreat College, NC Moody Bible Institute, IL Moore College of Art and Design, PA Moravian University, PA Morehouse College, GA Morningside University, IA Mount Aloysius College, PA Mount Carmel College of Nursing, OH Mount Holyoke College, MA Mount Ida College, MA Mount Marty University, SD Mount Mary University, WI Mount Mercy University, IA Mount Saint Joseph University, OH Mount Saint Mary College, NY Mount Saint Mary's University, CA Mount St. Mary's University, MD Mount Vernon Nazarene University, OH Muhlenberg College, PA Multnomah University, OR Muskingum University, OH National Labor College, MD Nazareth College, NY Nebraska Methodist College of Nursing & Allied Health, NE Nebraska Wesleyan University, NE Ner Israel Rabbinical College, MD Neumann University, PA New College of Florida, FL New England Institute of Technology, RI New Hampshire Institute of Art, NH New Mexico Institute of Mining and Technology, NM New York Institute of Technology-Manhattan Campus, NY New York School of Interior Design, NY Newberry College, SC Newbury College, MA Newman University, KS Niagara University, NY Nichols College, MA North Carolina Wesleyan College, NC North Central College, IL North Central University, MN North Greenville University, SC North Park University, IL Northern State University, SD Northern Vermont University, VT Northland College, WI Northwest Nazarene University, ID Northwest University, WA Northwestern College, IA Northwestern Oklahoma State University, OK Northwood University-Florida, FL Northwood University, MI Norwich University, VT Notre Dame College, OH Nyack College, NY Oakland City University, IN Oakwood University, AL Oberlin College, OH Occidental College, CA Oglethorpe University, GA Ohio Dominican University, OH Ohio Northern University, OH Ohio Wesleyan University, OH Oklahoma Baptist University, OK Oklahoma Christian University, OK Oklahoma City University, OK Oklahoma Wesleyan University, OK Olivet College, MI Olivet Nazarene University, IL Oral Roberts University, OK Oregon Institute of Technology, OR Oregon State University-Cascades Campus, OR Otis College of Art and Design, CA Ottawa University-Ottawa, KS Otterbein University, OH Ouachita Baptist University, AR Ozark Christian College, MO Pacific Lutheran University, WA Pacific Northwest College of Art, OR Pacific Union College, CA Palm Beach Atlantic University, FL Patrick Henry College, VA Paul Quinn College, TX Paul Smiths College of Arts and Science, NY Pennsylvania College of Health Sciences, PA Pennsylvania State University-Penn State Abington, PA Pennsylvania State University-Penn State Altoona, PA Pennsylvania State University-Penn State Beaver, PA Pennsylvania State University-Penn State Berks, PA Pennsylvania State University-Penn State Brandywine, PA Pennsylvania State University-Penn State DuBois, PA Pennsylvania State University-Penn State Erie-Behrend College, PA Pennsylvania State University-Penn State Fayette- Eberly, PA Pennsylvania State University-Penn State Greater Allegheny, PA Pennsylvania State University-Penn State Harrisburg, PA Pennsylvania State University-Penn State Hazleton, PA Pennsylvania State University-Penn State Lehigh Valley, PA Pennsylvania State University-Penn State Mont Alto, PA Pennsylvania State University-Penn State New Kensington, PA Pennsylvania State University-Penn State Schuylkill, PA Pennsylvania State University-Penn State Scranton, PA Pennsylvania State University-Penn State Shenango, PA Pennsylvania State University-Penn State Wilkes-Barre, PA Pennsylvania State University-Penn State York, PA Pfeiffer University, NC Piedmont International University, NC Piedmont University, GA Pitzer College, CA Plymouth State University, NH Point Loma Nazarene University, CA Point Park University, PA Point University, GA Pomona College, CA Presbyterian College, SC Presentation College, SD Principia College, IL Providence College, RI Queens University of Charlotte, NC Quincy University, IL Rabbinical Seminary of America, NY Radford University-Carilion, VA Randall University, OK Randolph College, VA Randolph-Macon College, VA Reed College, OR Reinhardt University, GA Rhode Island School of Design, RI Rhodes College, TN Rider University, NJ Ringling College of Art and Design, FL Ripon College, WI Riverside College of Health Careers, VA Rivier University, NH Roanoke College, VA Robert Morris University Illinois, IL Robert Morris University, PA Roberts Wesleyan College, NY Rochester University, MI Rockford University, IL Rockhurst University, MO Rocky Mountain College, MT Roger Williams University, RI Rollins College, FL Roosevelt University, IL Rose-Hulman Institute of Technology, IN Rosemont College, PA Russell Sage College, NY Rust College, MS Sacred Heart Major Seminary, MI Saint Ambrose University, IA Saint Anselm College, NH Saint Augustine's University, NC Saint Catharine College, KY Saint Edward's University, TX Saint Elizabeth University, NJ Saint Francis University, PA Saint John Fisher College, NY Saint Johns University, MN Saint Joseph's College of Maine, ME Saint Josephs College, IN Saint Martin's University, WA Saint Mary-of-the-Woods College, IN Saint Mary's College of California, CA Saint Mary's College, IN Saint Michael's College, VT Saint Norbert College, WI Saint Peter's University, NJ Saint Vincent College, PA Saint Xavier University, IL Salem College, NC Salve Regina University, RI San Diego Christian College, CA San Diego State University-Imperial Valley Campus, CA San Francisco Conservatory of Music, CA Sarah Lawrence College, NY School of the Art Institute of Chicago, IL School of the Museum of Fine Arts at Tufts University, MA Schreiner University, TX Scripps College, CA Seattle Pacific University, WA Sentara College of Health Sciences, VA Seton Hill University, PA Shaw University, NC Shenandoah University, VA Shepherd University, WV Shorter University, GA Siena College, NY Siena Heights University, MI Simpson College, IA Simpson University, CA Skidmore College, NY Smith College, MA Soka University of America, CA South Carolina State University, SC South Dakota School of Mines and Technology, SD Southeastern University, DC Southern Adventist University, TN Southern Arkansas University Main Campus, AR Southern University at New Orleans, LA Southern Vermont College, VT Southern Virginia University, VA Southern Wesleyan University, SC Southwest Baptist University, MO Southwestern Adventist University, TX Southwestern Assemblies of God University, TX Southwestern College, KS Southwestern Oklahoma State University, OK Southwestern University, TX Spartanburg Methodist College, SC Spelman College, GA Spring Hill College, AL Springfield College, MA St Bonaventure University, NY St Catherine University, MN St Lawrence University, NY St Olaf College, MN St Vincent's College, CT St. Andrews University, NC St. Francis College, NY St. Gregory's University, OK St. John's College, MD St. John's College, NM St. Joseph's College-Long Island, NY St. Joseph's University-New York, NY St. Mary's College of Maryland, MD St. Mary's University, TX St. Thomas Aquinas College, NY Stephens College, MO Sterling College, KS Stetson University, FL Stevenson University, MD Stillman College, AL Stonehill College, MA Sul Ross State University, TX SUM Bible College and Theological Seminary, LA SUNY at Fredonia, NY SUNY at Purchase College, NY SUNY College at Geneseo, NY SUNY College at Old Westbury, NY SUNY College at Plattsburgh, NY SUNY College at Potsdam, NY SUNY College of Agriculture and Technology at Cobleskill, NY SUNY College of Environmental Science and Forestry, NY SUNY College of Technology at Alfred, NY SUNY College of Technology at Canton, NY SUNY College of Technology at Delhi, NY SUNY Maritime College, NY SUNY Morrisville, NY SUNY Polytechnic Institute, NY Susquehanna University, PA Swarthmore College, PA Sweet Briar College, VA Tabor College, KS Talmudical Seminary of Bobov, NY Talmudical Seminary Oholei Torah, NY Taylor University Fort Wayne, IN Taylor University, IN Tennessee Temple University, TN Tennessee Wesleyan University, TN Texas A & M University-Galveston, TX Texas A&M University-Texarkana, TX Texas Lutheran University, TX Texas Wesleyan University, TX The Baptist College of Florida, FL The Boston Conservatory, MA The Christ College of Nursing and Health Sciences, OH The College of Idaho, ID The College of New Rochelle, NY The College of Saint Rose, NY The College of Saint Scholastica, MN The College of Wooster, OH The Evergreen State College, WA The Juilliard School, NY The King's College, NY The Master's University and Seminary, CA The New England Conservatory of Music, MA The University of Findlay, OH The University of Montana-Western, MT The University of Tennessee Southern, TN The University of the Arts, PA The University of the South, TN Thiel College, PA Thomas Aquinas College, CA Thomas More University, KY Thomas University, GA Tiffin University, OH Toccoa Falls College, GA Tougaloo College, MS Transylvania University, KY Trevecca Nazarene University, TN Trine University, IN Trinity Baptist College, FL Trinity Christian College, IL Trinity College, CT Trinity University, TX Trinity Washington University, DC Trocaire College, NY Truett McConnell University, GA Truman State University, MO Tusculum University, TN Tuskegee University, AL Union College, KY Union College, NE Union College, NY Union University, TN Unity College, ME University of Alaska Southeast, AK University of Arkansas at Pine Bluff, AR University of Bridgeport, CT University of Charleston, WV University of Connecticut-Avery Point, CT University of Connecticut-Stamford, CT University of Connecticut-Waterbury Campus, CT University of Dallas, TX University of Dubuque, IA University of Evansville, IN University of Hawaii at Hilo, HI University of Hawaii-West Oahu, HI University of Holy Cross, LA University of Houston-Victoria, TX University of Illinois Springfield, IL University of Jamestown, ND University of Lynchburg, VA University of Maine at Farmington, ME University of Maine at Fort Kent, ME University of Maine at Presque Isle, ME University of Mary Hardin-Baylor, TX University of Mary Washington, VA University of Mary, ND University of Maryland Eastern Shore, MD University of Minnesota-Crookston, MN University of Minnesota-Morris, MN University of Mobile, AL University of Montevallo, AL University of Mount Olive, NC University of Mount Union, OH University of New Hampshire at Manchester, NH University of North Carolina at Asheville, NC University of North Carolina School of the Arts, NC University of Northwestern-St Paul, MN University of Pittsburgh-Bradford, PA University of Pittsburgh-Greensburg, PA University of Pittsburgh-Johnstown, PA University of Portland, OR University of Providence, MT University of Puget Sound, WA University of Redlands, CA University of Richmond, VA University of Saint Francis-Fort Wayne, IN University of Saint Mary, KS University of Science and Arts of Oklahoma, OK University of Scranton, PA University of Sioux Falls, SD University of South Carolina Aiken, SC University of South Carolina Beaufort, SC University of St Thomas, TX University of the Ozarks, AR University of the Sciences, PA University of Tulsa, OK University of Valley Forge, PA University of Virginia's College at Wise, VA University of Wisconsin-Parkside, WI University of Wisconsin-Superior, WI Upper Iowa University, IA Urbana University, OH Ursinus College, PA Ursuline College, OH Utica University, NY Valley City State University, ND Valparaiso University, IN Vanguard University of Southern California, CA Vassar College, NY Vermont Technical College, VT Villa Maria College, NY Virginia Intermont College, VA Virginia Military Institute, VA Virginia State University, VA Virginia Union University, VA Virginia Wesleyan University, VA Viterbo University, WI Wabash College, IN Wagner College, NY Walsh University, OH Warner Pacific University, OR Warner University, FL Warren Wilson College, NC Wartburg College, IA Washington & Jefferson College, PA Washington Adventist University, MD Washington and Lee University, VA Washington College, MD Wayland Baptist University, TX Waynesburg University, PA Webber International University, FL Wellesley College, MA Wells College, NY Wentworth Institute of Technology, MA Wesley College, DE Wesleyan College, GA Wesleyan University, CT West Liberty University, WV West Virginia State University, WV West Virginia University Institute of Technology, WV West Virginia Wesleyan College, WV Western Colorado University, CO Western Connecticut State University, CT Western New England University, MA Western Oregon University, OR Westminster College, MO Westminster College, PA Westminster College, UT Westmont College, CA Wheaton College (Massachusetts), MA Wheaton College, IL Wheeling University, WV Wheelock College, MA Whitman College, WA Whittier College, CA Whitworth University, WA Wilberforce University, OH Willamette University, OR William Jessup University, CA William Jewell College, MO William Peace University, NC William Penn University, IA Williams Baptist University, AR Williams College, MA Wilmington College, OH Wilson College, PA Wingate University, NC Wisconsin Lutheran College, WI Wittenberg University, OH Wofford College, SC Woodbury University, CA Wright State University-Lake Campus, OH Xavier University of Louisiana, LA Yeshivath Viznitz, NY York College of Pennsylvania, PA York College, NE Young Harris College, GA no stress flag 1 stress flag 2 3 4 5 closed or merged 2008 2021 Rider University, NJ had 3,306 students reported in 2021. Note: Closures and mergers reflect instances of closure, merger or suspension of operations in the period from 2008 to 2021. Some merged schools still reported students. *Hawai’i Pacific University said it found an error in its IPEDS submission for its institutional aid metric for the 2021-2022 collection period, and requested a correction from IPEDS. Using the data point they submitted would not change the number of flags the school hit that year. Sources: Bloomberg analysis of 973 small, nonprofit four-year colleges; National Center for Education Statistics

School Comments Bloomberg News reached out to schools that met three or more flags; some comments have been condensed Albion College, MI Albright College, PA Aquinas College, MI Arcadia University, PA Beloit College, WI Chowan University, NC Curry College, MA Delaware Valley University, PA Earlham College, IN Elmira College, NY Fairleigh Dickinson University - Florham Campus, NJ Goucher College, MD Graceland University-Lamoni, IA Grand View University, IA Hampden-Sydney College, VA Hawai’i Pacific University, HI Hilbert College, NY Indiana Wesleyan University - Marion, IN Johnson & Wales University - Charlotte, NC Keystone College, PA Lincoln University, PA Lycoming College, PA University of Lynchburg, VA Monmouth College, IL Mount Saint Mary's University, CA Northwood University, MI Ohio Wesleyan University, OH Pacific Lutheran University, WA Randolph College, VA Reed College, OR Reinhardt University, GA Rosemont College, PA St. Edward's University, TX Sarah Lawrence College, NY Seattle Pacific University, WA Susquehanna University, PA Texas Wesleyan University, TX Thiel College, PA Thomas More University, KY University of Pittsburgh-Johnstown, PA University of Puget Sound, WA Wagner College, NY Washington & Jefferson College, PA Washington College, MD Willamette University, OR Declined to comment Didn't provide a response to requests for comment or didn't reply ►

About 10 four-year institutions have closed or announced plans to close their doors this year, including Iowa Wesleyan University and Holy Names University in California. Others such as Salus University in Pennsylvania are merging with nearby schools, and some, like Massachusetts’ Assumption University, are adding programs and targeting new groups of students.

“You have an industry with falling demand and overcapacity. We would be foolish to expect anything other than consolidation and shakeout,” said Michael Frandsen, president of Wittenberg University in Springfield, Ohio, which met five of the flags in Bloomberg’s analysis.

Fitch Ratings predicts 20 to 25 schools will close annually going forward, which is roughly double the annual average of closures at private, nonprofit four-year institutions over the last decade.

The implications of all of this are manifold. Closures threaten to disrupt the educational path of thousands of students. They also ripple through local economies as students disappear from campuses and staff and faculty lose jobs. The impact even extends to the financial system where investors hold some of the $238 billion of higher-education debt in the municipal bond market. Roughly $650 million of that is distressed or defaulted, meaning borrowers experienced an adverse event, like a missed payment or a draw on a reserve fund.

Demographics are largely to blame, as full-time undergraduate enrollment has slid from 11.5 million in 2010 to 9.5 million in 2021, according to NCES data.

At the root of the problem is a declining US birth rate in the wake of the financial crisis. From 1980 to 2007, US birth rates were largely stable, but they have since plummeted about 20%, according to national statistics.

Fewer students mean shrinking revenue streams — and colleges without investments or an endowment to fall back on will need to make changes to appeal to different kinds of students or build out new sources of income, like graduate schools.

The trend has also pushed some to offer discounts in the form of institutional aid, which can cut into their finances. The average institutional discount rate for first-time undergraduates has risen about 10 percentage points since 2013, according to an April report by the National Association of College and University Business Officers.

To be sure, waves of stress have plagued universities before. An unprecedented period of growth to accommodate the baby-boomer generation preceded a series of shutdowns, with a peak of 13 in 1974, according to published data in the Review of Industrial Organization.

But this time, the potential cliff is steeper.

What’s more, the value proposition of a degree has changed. The sticker price to attend a private, four-year school is now about $41,000 a year. Students are going into debt at higher rates. And when they graduate, the wage premium their education fetches, or the pay gap between those with and without degrees, is shrinking. These issues have shaken the public’s perception of college and universities: In fact, confidence in higher-ed has fallen across all ages, education levels and political groups since 2015, according to a June Gallup poll.

Add in rising costs from elevated inflation, tumult from a global pandemic and unbridled spending trends on everything from dorms to stadiums, and the outlook appears increasingly dire for some schools.

Tracking Stress Signals

To uncover which colleges have been facing growing stress, Bloomberg’s analysis screened for a higher admission rate; a low yield rate, or the percent of students who accept offers; declining enrollment; increasing tuition subsidies, which effectively discount sticker tuition prices to attract students; and negative operating margins, as measured by the amount of money gained or lost from core functions, excluding the impact of investments or endowments.

Tallying which schools met these thresholds, it’s clear the share of schools under pressure has risen. In 2021, about 50 schools met at least four of these five metrics for stress, roughly triple the amount five years prior. Seven met all five.

A partial release of the 2022-2023 collection period showed more schools gaining than losing flags on acceptance rates and yield. Meanwhile, data on institutional aid showed some improvement. About 90 schools lost the flag while roughly 60 new schools hit it. However, the data was not included in Bloomberg’s analysis as it was not a full dataset that included information on enrollment and operating margins.

If the analysis had incorporated the incomplete dataset, six schools would have seen enough improvement to lose at least two flags, including Reinhardt University in Georgia, Bethany College in West Virginia and Bluefield University in Virginia. Another 14 colleges that met three or more flags in Bloomberg’s analysis showed enough improvement to lose at least one flag. They wouldn’t hit more than two flags once the complete dataset is released either.

Small Schools Have Been Accepting More Students But Fewer Are Saying Yes 2008

2008 2021 Percentage of applicants admitted More schools Fewer 0 25 50 75 100% Percentage of students accepted who enroll More schools Fewer 0 25 50 75 100% Percentage of applicants admitted Percentage of students accepted who enroll More schools Fewer schools 0% 0% 25 25 The median yield went from 36% to 21% between 2008 and 2021 50 50 In the meantime, the median admission rate went from 68% to 72% 75 75 Fewer schools More schools 100 100 Sources: Bloomberg analysis of 973 small, nonprofit four-year colleges; National Center for Education Statistics

“If you are seeing 80%+ acceptance rates year over year, I think that is indicative of desperation,” said Jonathan Mondillo, head of North American fixed income at investment company Abrdn, which manages over $1 billion in municipal assets, including higher-ed debt. “There are a whole host of other factors you can look at: debt metrics, how levered the university has been, how well they’ve controlled costs, and what margins have looked like. But all of that stems from admissions and enrollment. That’s the canary in the coal mine.”

Several schools that met four or five flags in Bloomberg’s analysis are openly struggling.

For instance, Cardinal Stritch University, a small Catholic school in Wisconsin, began winding down operations in May, citing the pandemic and downward enrollment trends. Earlier this year, Seattle Pacific University in Washington said it was cutting its budget for academic programs by 40%. And in November, the College of Saint Rose’s Board of Trustees voted to close the New York-based school.

“Every time I get together with presidents, more and more of us are talking about struggles,” said Frandsen, Wittenberg’s president. “It’s real, and people who are in denial about it are going to have a real problem.”

Frandsen said Wittenberg’s enrollment is up, and early indicators of demand for the next academic year look promising. But longer-term, he knows the demographics pose a real challenge. There’s little room for missteps: The school only has $6 million in its board-designated endowment, which is the portion of those funds that are unrestricted. Therefore, the administration is investing in career development, experiential learning and extracurriculars to improve the student experience, and trying to become more attractive to non-traditional students who’d like to return to college.

To be sure, meeting the flags is not a guarantee of financial problems.

Even some of the most prestigious and strongest schools in the country hit at least one or two metrics in Bloomberg’s analysis. But experts interviewed say they see schools with more flags as likely to have a harder time recovering from external issues like an economic downturn or a pandemic.

“These are metrics that at least warrant you looking deeper into those schools,” said Lisa Washburn, chief credit officer and managing director for Municipal Market Analytics, one of the six who reviewed Bloomberg’s analysis. “There may be mitigating factors, there may be something unique about that school, but it doesn’t mean that they’re not facing disproportionate challenges.”

Some schools counter that high acceptance rates and growing aid aren’t indicative of strains, but rather demonstrate an institution’s values and mission to make a college degree more accessible, especially for low-income and minority students.

Closures also take time and there are many factors that can hasten or slow a closure. For instance, colleges with large endowments have more cushion against external shocks, and may be able to operate through challenges for longer periods.

But these challenges aren’t going away, and schools will need to figure out how to proceed, said Emily Wadhwani, a senior director at Fitch Ratings.

“We aren’t going to miraculously grow more high school students in the next decade,” she said. “We have too many seats to fill in the sector for all of those students. So the question then becomes for that school, are you going to find more students or are you going to shrink?”

Colleges Push Back

Of the schools contacted by Bloomberg, some said it’s not possible to glean a complete picture of an individual college’s situation using only five metrics. They highlighted additional factors like balance sheets and donations. Other institutions also pointed to steps they’re taking to boost enrollment like targeting different student profiles and adding new academic programs.

“I don’t think anyone would argue that these are challenging times for most higher-education institutions, especially those that are smaller,” said Travis Carter, dean of admission and financial aid at Randolph College in Lynchburg, Virginia, which met four flags in the 2021-2022 data collection period.

Still, he says the metrics don’t give a full picture of an institution’s fiscal health, especially as the timeframe in the analysis includes the pandemic and an economic downturn. Randolph has an approximately $180 million endowment, and he cited its ability to renovate its athletics center and science building without taking on additional debt or financing.

Decreasing Number of Graduating High School Students Numbers of students graduating from high school are projected to decrease significantly following changing demographics trends 2000 2010 2020 2030 2.0 2.5 3.0 3.5M Source: Western Interstate Commission for Higher Education

Like other schools, Randolph has also shown signs of recovery. In 2021 and 2022, Randolph’s new student numbers climbed, and it welcomed a first-year class this year that’s 40% bigger than last, Carter said.

Willamette University in Salem, Oregon, also pointed to rebounding enrollment since 2021, when it met three flags. Financial hardships, health concerns including the mental toll from the pandemic, and a desire for a more “normal” college experience led many students to defer enrollment or take a gap year at that time. Now, Willamette’s headcount is the highest since 2014 across all of its schools, Vice President for Enrollment William Mullen said.

“When most of our competitors were cutting programs and budgets, Willamette’s strong financial position allowed us to invest in important new initiatives,” said Mullen, citing the incorporation of its art and design school and launch of a computing and information sciences school. Plus, Willamette had its best fundraising year ever, with $27 million in new gifts in the fiscal year that ended in June, he said.

Similarly, Kimberly Kvaal, the chief financial officer for the University of Puget Sound, said the lack of a balance-sheet metric is a “significant omission” in Bloomberg’s analysis. The Tacoma, Washington-based school hit four flags in the 2021-2022 collection period. But Kvaal said the university’s growing endowment, healthy liquidity, and manageable debt give her confidence in the school’s financial stability.

Taking Stock

Some schools may be seeing signs of progress since the pandemic. But the most recent numbers show only a modest 2.1% increase in overall US undergraduate enrollment this fall compared to last year, according to the National Student Clearinghouse, which is separate from the Integrated Postsecondary Education Data System survey conducted by NCES that Bloomberg’s analysis used.

You have an industry with falling demand and overcapacity. We would be foolish to expect anything other than consolidation and shakeout. Michael Frandsen, president of Wittenberg University

That’s the first increase since the outbreak of Covid-19. Still, freshman enrollment declined by 3.6% over the period, the data show.

“I wish I could say the pandemic was such an anomaly, that by next year or the year after, 98% of the schools that have those flags are going to be in a different state,” said Jim Hundrieser, vice president of consulting and business development at the National Association of College and University Business Officers. “I see nothing that suggests that.”

Hundrieser, who is one of the six experts who vetted Bloomberg’s analysis, sees the environment as a chance for schools to take stock of what’s working. “We need to be reconsidering and re-evaluating our systems,” he said. “This is an opportunity for institutions to take a critical look and think about how they will operate differently.”

Rider, a college known for its business school and choir program, met four metrics in Bloomberg’s analysis. Fall 2021 full-time enrollment was down over 20% from 2011. Admission officials gave offers to 82% of applicants, yet the share of students who accepted was just 9%. Institutional aid was rising. And the school was operating at a deficit. It was a difficult time: Covid-19 cost Rider about $31 million in increased expenses and lost revenue, overshadowing the $19 million it received in stimulus, about half of which went directly to students, Dell’Omo, the school’s president, estimates.

Rider President Gregory Dell’Omo

Rider’s administration tried to raise cash by relocating its choir college and selling the real estate in upscale Princeton. But the deal has faced challenges in part because of student and faculty opposition, as well as protracted litigation. (The school is moving in a “positive direction” with regards to a settlement, Dell’Omo said.) For a period, Rider had to rely on a line of credit to cover operating expenses until student revenue started flowing again in August.

Over the past two years, however, Rider has seen gains after restructuring operations — including eliminating or archiving several bachelors programs such as American studies and piano, and adding new programs related to technology and health care.

Compared to 2021, overall full-time enrollment for the fall gained 1% while full-time enrollment for undergraduates increased 27%. Its most recent freshman acceptance rate was 79% and freshman yield was 11%, according to school officials.

Early indicators of demand — like applications and visits to campus — are ahead of last year. Plus, fundraising is up after donors increased giving during the pandemic. So far, the efforts appear to be paying off. The university’s deficit is shrinking, and it expects to turn a profit in fiscal 2026.

Students Left Wanting

Schools can make a turnaround, but attending a struggling institution can have a chilling effect on the student experience. Meg Ryan, a senior at Rider University, has watched what she says used to feel like a close-knit community falter as the school tries to rightsize itself.

“As a student, it’s really taken a toll on my trust in the school itself,” Ryan said. “It’s kind of had all of us thinking like, what’s going to happen?”

Analysts describe the higher-education market as a barbell, where top schools, like Princeton University and Middlebury College, prosper and schools at the tail slip further into distress. At Boston University, for instance, business is booming after a decision to go test-optional drove a “significant increase” in applications, allowing the school to drop its acceptance rate to 14% for the class of 2026. Yale University and Columbia University have also seen their applications surge.

As a student, it’s really taken a toll on my trust in the school itself. It’s kind of had all of us thinking like, what’s going to happen? Meg Ryan, Rider University student

Schools in the tail, however, will need to differentiate themselves away from the stereotypical liberal arts offerings, experts say. That means fewer schools where students can study anything from archeology to philosophy, and likely a shift among surviving schools on the margins toward jobs-based and technical programs that serve a specific need in the economy.

A rise in closures risks derailing the education of tens of thousands of students, saddling them with debt and deepening inequality.

Students impacted by a closure take longer to finish their programs and are 50% less likely to earn a credential than those whose schools stayed open, according to an April report by the State Higher Education Executive Officers Association.

The harm is magnified for students of color, who, with the exception of Asians, are less likely than White peers to finish if their school folds. An earlier study by the same group and the National Student Clearinghouse Research Center found institutions that wound up closing enrolled a larger proportion of students of color, women, and Pell Grant recipients than open ones.

“The Ivies of the world will always have room to fund pure scholarship, but a lot of schools will never be in that position,” said Keith Morgan, head of the education group at investment bank Piper Sandler. “The closing and consolidation of schools is nascent, and it will continue, I am quite confident.”