Welcome to the Bloomberg Surveillance newsletter, a daily look at the best interviews and insights from Bloomberg Television and Radio’s flagship morning show co-hosted by Tom Keene, Jonathan Ferro and me. Sign up here if you’re not yet a newsletter subscriber.

‘Cornerstone for the banks story’

The world may be falling apart, but the banks are still making more money than even they imagined they would.

It was impossible to escape that takeaway as JPMorgan Chase & Co. opened earnings season for the big US banks, even as Chief Executive Officer Jamie Dimon warned, “This may be the most dangerous time the world has seen in decades.”

Citigroup Inc. boosted its forecast for full-year interest earnings. Wells Fargo & Co. delivered a beat against estimates. And JPMorgan kept delivering record amounts of interest-related profits, raising its expected net interest income at least three times this year, as Bloomberg's Sonali Basak noted on Surveillance.

“The market is thinking if we have a soft landing in the second half of next year, financials tend to do better nine months before, and JPMorgan is one of the top three of the weightings for the sector,” CFRA’s Ken Leon said. “So that to me is the cornerstone for the banks story.”

The financial haul comes at a time of incredible turmoil both economically and geopolitically, which makes these earnings calls a bit awkward. Consumer spending is starting to slow, bankruptcies are ticking up, and an existential risk is embroiling the Middle East as the Hamas attack on Israel threatens to escalate into a regional war.

Just don't look for geopolitical storm clouds in JPMorgan’s earnings. The cold-hearted numbers paint a picture of better-than-expected loan performance, surprisingly good bond trading revenues and a sense that higher yields are padding the pockets of banks much more than the average household.

“JPMorgan has had a great year relative to the other banks in performance. It’s the risk-off trade,” RBC Capital Markets’ Gerard Cassidy said. “When we go around and talk to institutional investors around the country as well as Canada and Europe everybody is — not everyone, the vast majority of — investors are underweight banks — except they own JPMorgan.”

Of course, there are some potential trouble spots. Ed Yardeni of Yardeni Research noted that “things are breaking in the commercial real estate market.” That kind of lending promises to be a focus next week when more regional banks start reporting.

And New York Life Insurance’s Lauren Goodwin said the bank results were signaling “late-cycle economics,” even if a US recession is “nowhere to be seen.”

Not only are banks profiting from higher benchmark yields as the Fed raises rates, but they're also benefiting from complacent depositors who aren't making too much noise about getting a bigger cut of the profits.

At the end of the day, JPMorgan and Citi don't need customer deposits and don't have to offer much interest on them, leaving them with pools of virtually free money to lend out at much higher rates. The gap has been surprising even to JPMorgan's chief financial officer who referred to the “slower reprice” than expected.

We’ve got a lot to look forward to next week.

‘Clown show’

Comedian Sebastian Maniscalco is known for the catchphrase “Aren’t you embarrassed?” Jon seized on that to describe Washington’s chaos, especially the House Republican caucus. Surveillance guests found that an apt comparison.

“They can’t even get a speaker of the House,” Ed Yardeni lamented. AGF Investments’ Greg Valliere went for a harsher metaphor.

“It’s a clown show. It’s a circus. And the serious part of the story is there are three big things that have to get done,” Valliere said. “A vast majority in both houses, in both parties, want to do all three, and they can’t get it done.”

The list: Approving a budget, sending more aid to Ukraine and arranging new assistance for Israel, said Valliere, who expressed bafflement at where the speaker race goes next after GOP nominee Steve Scalise abruptly withdrew in the face of a fresh intraparty revolt.

GOP Representative Mike Lawler, whose New York district went for Joe Biden in 2020, said the process begins anew today, but he couldn’t identify who might get the required 217 votes — and he rued Kevin McCarthy’s ouster as “the single stupidest political act that I’ve ever seen.”

Bloomberg’s Annmarie Hordern, who joined us on set with Tom covering the annual meeting of the International Monetary Fund and World Bank, said that Wall Streeters might well imagine that politicians were watching 10-year Treasury yields as a gauge of investors’ disgust. But in Washington, she said, that’s not happening.

Valliere saw a possible ray of hope in that vein, with a fresh slap from credit-rating companies at US debt to shake feckless politicians. But like Annmarie, he wasn’t that optimistic. “You’re speaking logically,” he said, “and logic doesn’t always apply.”

Eyes on Israel

“We’ve got several really rocky weeks ahead,” AGF’s Valliere predicted today on Surveillance, as the world watched Israel mass troops outside the Gaza Strip and warn civilians to evacuate the northern part of the territory.

Iran, a sponsor of Gaza’s Hamas rulers, remains a wild card for risk of a widening war. So does the Hezbollah militia in Lebanon, especially with the signals of a ground invasion by Israeli armor and infantry into Gaza. Israeli scholar Paul Liptz said the assault might not be a conventional mass attack.

Expand An Israeli howitzer was part of the buildup of soldiers and weapons outside the Gaza Strip. Photographer: Kobi Wolf/Bloomberg

“We want to destroy Hamas, because Hamas has designated its goal as destroying the state of Israel,” said Liptz, a Tel Aviv University professor. “At the same time, we have hostages there. This is always a very delicate situation.”

Liptz took a historian’s view in trying to explain Israel’s determination to strike back after gunmen killed 1,300 people, mostly civilians, and wounded thousands more.

“This is defined very much in terms of the Holocaust,” Liptz said. “In that kind of situation, and I know it’s kind of maybe hard for America to imagine what it is from the Israeli side, we actually believe that if Hamas had managed to get a little bit further into the country, it would have been the end of the state of Israel.”

More from Surveillance

Bloomberg Surveillance is live weekdays from 6 to 9 a.m. New York time. Watch on Bloomberg Television, on the Terminal at TV<GO> and on YouTube; or listen to the show on Bloomberg Radio and RADI<GO> from 7 to 10 a.m. You can watch full episodes and subscribe to the Bloomberg Surveillance podcast. Check out GTV<GO> for all the charts seen on Bloomberg Television.

Get Bloomberg newsletters in your inbox

Supply Lines for daily insights into supply chains and global trade

Energy Daily for a daily guide to the energy and commodities markets that power the global economy

Bw Daily for unique perspectives, original reporting and insightful analysis from Businessweek’s renowned journalists, every weekday

Crypto for an essential read on the crypto universe, delivered straight to your inbox twice a week

Sign up for more newsletters at Bloomberg.com.