It was easy to criticize big cities that found themselves struggling with challenges like climate change, inequality and inadequate transportation in 2023. But several new books tackled these issues head on, and offered a path forward.

These books offered a vital window into the lives of people facing issues like housing instability and fleeing climate disasters. They helped readers think critically about the status quo and pushed leaders to act on inclusive transportation measures and parking reform — and they suggested solutions for global problems with new frameworks like biourbanism.

Here’s a roundup of 15 new releases that Bloomberg CityLab read and wrote about this year. They allowed us to explore different places, histories and possibilities. We hope they’ll bring you to new worlds, too.

Transportation

Expand Source: Island Press

Inclusive Transportation by Veronica Davis

What do we mean by “equity” and how do we achieve it? Urban planner Veronica Davis ponders that question in her latest book Inclusive Transportation, which looks at how inequalities are cemented into American infrastructure to divide cities (and often, Black, Brown or low-income neighborhoods) — through streets, interstates and highways. She spoke to CityLab about the need for bold leaders to make difficult decisions, purposefully engage communities and properly educate people on the solutions available to them. “In 2023, with the knowledge that we have, with the tools available to us, building a highway through a neighborhood is lazy,” Davis said.

Expand Source: University of Chicago Press

The Great American Transit Disaster by Nicholas Dagen Bloom

Don’t just blame cars for the deterioration of public transportation in American cities, argues Nicholas Dagen Bloom — blame the “compounding decisions made by city leaders, state leaders and private sector people.” His book, The Great American Transit Disaster, explores US transit systems of the 20th century and the multitude of crises and poor choices that have led many municipalities to abandon them. “You didn’t have to build systems of parkways and highways that were so comprehensive that you sacrifice neighborhoods. You didn’t have to completely demolish your downtowns, create massive federal programs that paid for parking ramps and give tax breaks on downtown parking,” Bloom said. “These are political choices.”

Disrupting D.C.: The Rise of Uber and the Fall of the City by Katie J. Wells, Kafui Attoh and Declan Cullen

Remember the old days without Uber? Before the company changed expectations for ride-hailing and created a whole new gig economy, dissatisfaction with the taxi industry’s outdated vehicles and subpar service ran deep. Disrupting D.C. dives into the promises made, kept and broken by Uber, specifically in the nation’s capital. It chronicles how its rise “ended up being deeply destructive,” CityLab’s David Zipper writes, “because the city sought to outsource societal responsibilities to a venture-backed startup.” Besides the inequality reinforced through the popularization of precarious gig work, and the safety and labor issues the company raised, the book also cites evidence that ride-hailing has overall led to more emissions, less transit ridership and frustrating levels of congestion.

Expand Source: W. W. Norton & Company

Crossings: How Road Ecology is Shaping the Future of Our Planet by Ben Goldfarb

In Crossings, environmental journalist Ben Goldfarb makes a heartbreaking case for how streets and highways have massively affected wildlife. And he doesn’t stop at roadkill. He describes some of the more subtle methods of biological annihilation, such as road noise deterring songbirds from critical migratory stopover areas and an “impermeable wall of vehicles” that prevents animals like elk and longhorn from migrating across the American West. With cars and concrete, humans are challenging the notion that only the strongest animals survive. “The opposite is true on the roads,” Goldfarb says. “Cars are these indiscriminate predators that kill any animal walking in front of them.”

Cities as Solutions

Expand Source: Penguin Random House

Green Earth by Kim Stanley Robinson

Kim Stanley Robinson is credited with helping create the genre of climate fiction, and his book Green Earth is yet another example of that. Set in Washington, DC, Robinson draws from his own personal experience living and working in the capital city. “What I like about DC is that there is kind of an electricity in the air, a human electricity,” Robinson told CityLab. “You walk the streets, you see people from all over the world. To go to the world capital and settle there is a statement. It’s an attempt to wrest control of one’s fate.” But where the fictional part of the story begins is in its characters — when he portrays federal bureaucrats as a positive force for good.

Expand Source: Biourbanism Publishing Pty Ltd

Biourbanism: Cities as Nature by Adrian McGregor

“If we can understand that cities are part of nature — even if they don’t really look like nature — that means we’ve got to change how we plan with them, how we work with them, and what our future looks like on spaceship Earth,” Adrian McGregor says. That’s the premise of Biourbanism: Cities as Nature, which looks at how effective urban planning and design can be achieved by viewing cities through a natural lens. McGregor sees cities as instrumental to lead the fight against the climate crisis. “There’s a policy gap between a federal government making decarbonization commitments and actual city policy,” he says. “They’re not really thinking clearly about where the emissions are coming from and therefore how to target them.”

Expand Source: Penguin Random House

Paved Paradise: How Parking Explains the World by Henry Grabar

Journalist Henry Grabar has a pretty simple solution for better city living: parking reform. The act of parking, for so many, is an aggravating experience. “You’re more likely to be killed over a parking space than you are to be killed by a shark,” Grabar told CityLab. In his book Paved Paradise, he argues that the key to happier residents is transforming parking policies to make them smarter and more convenient, and by undoing some of the privileges given to drivers in order to help boost multimodal transportation. “It’s very hard to overrule the instinctive feeling that parking ought to be available when I want it, where I want it, for the price I want to pay, which is zero,” Grabar said. “A lot of smart parking policy deviates from those assumptions, like charging for coveted street parking in busy locations, or trying to encourage people to park in a garage a few blocks away and then walk a bit.”

Equality and Cities

Built From the Fire by Victor Luckerson

What happened after the Tulsa race massacre? It’s a question often lost when thinking about the violence that saw one of the wealthiest historic Black American neighborhoods burned down, and its residents killed or chased out. Built From the Fire seeks to tell the story of Greenwood from start to end, past the initial tragedy that wiped out Black Wall Street and the destructive urban renewal plans and physically divisive highways that followed. For Victor Luckerson, who moved to Tulsa and embedded himself in Greenwood’s community and archives in order to tell the story right, the policies and actions of local government officials did as much damage, if not more, to the neighborhood’s heritage than the initial conflagration. “I would say the massacre was more devastating in the short term, and urban renewal more devastating in the long term,” he says.

Expand Source: Disney Hyperion

There Goes the Neighborhood by Jade Adia

It’s not just heartbreak and bad grades that teens are facing — now, it’s gentrification too. Author Jade Adia found inspiration in the Los Angeles youth that came out to protest against police brutality after the murder of George Floyd, and wrote There Goes the Neighborhood with those young people in mind. Her debut young adult novel tells the story of 15-year-old Rhea, who devises a plan to save her best friend’s family from eviction, as gentrifiers threaten to upend her neighborhood in South Los Angeles. “I wanted to tackle the topic [of gentrification] in the most accessible way possible,” Adia told CityLab, “by putting young people and their experiences on the front lines of the conversation.”

Climate Change

Expand Source: Simon & Schuster

The Great Displacement by Jake Bittle

Climate migration in America has already begun. Bittle documents this harrowing byproduct of climate change in The Great Displacement, telling the stories of numerous journeys made by families escaping the destruction caused by wildfires, hurricanes and floods. Bittle’s portraits reveal how unprepared the country is to manage the climate retreat and bring relief to those displaced from their homes, and sheds light on the ever-increasing need for more affordable housing after major disasters.

Shades of Blue: Connecting the Drops in India’s Cities by Harini Nagendra and Seema Mundoli

India faced a deadly monsoon season this year, with catastrophic flooding disasters that claimed as many as 2,000 lives. With the risk of climate disaster only increasing, Bengaluru-based ecologists Harini Nagendra and Seema Mundoli look to ancient knowledge and traditions to guide them to future solutions in their book, Shades of Blue: Connecting the Drops in India’s Cities. While focused on community-oriented and sustainable approaches to protecting cities and rejuvenating water bodies, the authors also want to get back to the positive memories people attach to the water. “For us, the book is a way of bringing that back,” Mundoli says. “Everything doesn’t have to be about gloom and doom.”



Climate Resilience for an Aging Nation by Danielle Arigoni

Again and again, the numbers show that older people are disproportionately killed in climate disasters. Climate Resilience for an Aging Nation lays out why it’s so important to plan for the safety of elderly residents in the face of those growing risks. “I’m haunted by the idea that one out of five people over 65 doesn’t drive anymore,” Arigoni told CityLab, citing mobility as one of the key issues in which older populations are often overlooked. “The presumption that people can just get in their car and drive away from the wildfire, or move to a hotel because the hurricane is coming — that’s a pretty radical departure from reality.”

Design and Architecture

Expand

Portal: San Francisco’s Ferry Building and the Reinvention of American Cities by John King

San Francisco’s Ferry Building has weathered many literal storms, but perhaps its biggest threat has been irrelevance. “This building that now is this cherished icon of the past was a very edge-pushing building,” architecture and urban design critic John King told CityLab. Despite no longer being used as the city’s primary transportation hub, the Ferry Building has become central to the city’s identity. In his book Portal, King traces the building’s past to reflect on San Francisco’s resilience and future.

Expand

The Brutalists by Owen Hopkins

The use of black and white photography in The Brutalists echoes the usual emphasis placed on the artistry, form and lighting of brutalist architecture. For some, the color scheme may speak to the dying nature of the construction style as more of the buildings are torn down and left solely to memory. For architecture historian Owen Hopkins, however, brutalism is as much a part of architecture’s present as its past. Bringing attention to both widely celebrated and lesser-known architects, his revisitation of the movement references structures built as recently as 2016. “There’s a way of thinking about Brutalism that embraces and in many ways depends on its paradoxes,” Hopkins says.

Expand

Other People’s Homes: Suburban Kerb Appeal by Sandy Weir

A pandemic-fueled curiosity for the unique architecture found in Melbourne is what originally led Sandy Weir to post photographs of local homes online. The virality of the project surprised Weir, and put her on the path to publishing Other People’s Homes. She went on to capture images of houses all over Australia and its quirky suburbs for 18 months. “We’re such a nation of entertainers, so our houses are becoming more of showpieces,” she said. Through 224 pages, Weir traces the influence of immigration from Asia and Southern Europe on the country’s architecture, and features a mix of styles like art deco and the Queenslander. The result is a fun, colorful showcase of Australia’s playful character as told through its eclectic homes.

What books should be on our 2024 reading list? Drop us a line at citylab@bloomberg.net.