Squeaks, creaks and the occasional sight of a shadowy figure scampering away are reminders that humans are not alone in the city. Animals like rats, raccoons and foxes have thrived alongside their human neighbors for as long as cities have existed. But things like land use decisions and human-induced climate change are changing how we coexist.

As cities sprawl further out into the surrounding natural landscape, or slice through forests, encounters between humans and urban wildlife are increasing — often to the detriment of the animal. And hotter temperatures in urban areas are making life in the city harder for not only us but also urban critters that depend on our built environment for refuge and resources. At the same time, there have been growing efforts to protect these fragile ecosystems.

To illustrate how our changing cities are shaping the lives of animals — and how their presence is shaping our own behaviors and policies — below are some of the most notable urban wildlife stories from this year.

A black bear stumbles into the ‘most magical place on earth’

In September, a portion of Orlando’s Walt Disney World Resort temporarily shut down after visitors spotted a 150-pound (68-kilogram) black bear near the Magic Kingdom. Officials with the Florida Fish and Wildlife Conservation Commission, who captured the female bear and released her near Ocala National Forest, said the ursine interloper was likely searching for food when she ended up in the theme park. The incident occurred just months after another bear was spotted in downtown Orlando.

Expand A black bear sits in an oak tree at Lake Eola Park in the heart of downtown Orlando, Florida, on June 4, 2023. Photographer: Roger Simmons/Orlando Sentinel/Getty Images

It’s not just Florida — many places across the US (and beyond) have reported an increase in bear activity, with reports of the omnivores entering people’s backyards, roaming through neighborhoods and destroying cars. This year alone they’ve been spotted in busy metropolitans including New York and Washington, DC, as well as in more rural areas like Missoula, Montana, where a growing conflict between humans and bears has prompted the government to expand its bear buffer zone to keep the animals from reaching food-laden trash in neighborhoods.

Conservationists expect bear sightings to become more common in coming years amid rising global temperatures, and as the loss of natural habitats forces them to travel further to find resources.

Wildlife crossings get new funding

Expand Some of the first customers of the Cervidae Peak Wildlife Overpass captured on camera. Source: Idaho Fish and Game

Earlier this year, Idaho completed its first wildlife overpass — a roughly 150-feet-long (46-meter) bridge built above a busy stretch of Highway 21, which runs through some of the state’s most stunning natural landscapes. Animal tracks and photos captured by the state Fish and Game department revealed some of the first animals to use the Cervidae Peak Wildlife Overpass, namely mule deer on their annual migration for winter. Officials say while it will take time for animals to get familiarized with the overpass, the project — which also includes fencing running parallel to the roadway — could reduce wildlife collisions by 80%.

America’s roads have become one of the biggest threats to the nation’s wildlife, with motor vehicles killing an estimated one million vertebrate animals a year. They also damage fragile ecosystems and prevent animals from reproducing and foraging for crucial resources.

Wildlife passages, including bridges and tunnels, are seen as an effective solution to the growing conservation crisis created by America’s roadways. But until recently, funding to construct them was limited. In 2021, the Wildlife Crossings Pilot Program was established under the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law, making $350 million in grants available over five years for such projects. Earlier this month, the program announced its latest round of grants, totaling $110 million for 19 projects across 17 states.

Dolphins return to New York

A pair of dolphins made a splash in several news outlets at the beginning of 2023 when they were spotted swimming in the Bronx River. The New York City Parks and Recreation department said it’s likely the dolphins “naturally found their way to the river in search of fish.” The sighting from late January marked the first time since 2017 that the aquatic mammals have been seen in that river, which was not only a rare treat for New Yorkers but also a sign that the city’s clean-up effort is making progress.

Expand A turtle rests on a log in the Bronx River. Photographer: Andrew Lichtenstein/Corbis News/Getty Images

Like many other urban waterways in the US, the Bronx River served for years as a dumpsite for industrial waste. The toxic pollution, along with littering and habitat destruction, drove away several species of marine wildlife like dolphins. But efforts to restore the health of the river have been underway for decades, from both the city and volunteer groups like the Bronx River Alliance. To bring back native species, the parks department also regularly restocks the river with alewife and other fish that predators feed on.

Cities across the US and overseas have embarked on ambitious efforts to clean up their rivers, motivated by not only biodiversity and environmental gains but also economic and recreational benefits. Some efforts, for example, aim to make once-toxic waterways safe enough to swim in.

A family of foxes finds a home in Chicago’s urban park

Chicago is no stranger to wildlife sightings, with a snapping turtle and a coyote gaining celebrity status after finding themselves in the Chicago River and a Quiznos, respectively. Joining the A-listers this year is a family of red foxes — two adults and six babies (or kits) — who settled in the busy Millennium Park in the city center this spring. Officials called the family a “welcome addition,” closing parts of the park each day to allow them to roam undisturbed.

Expand Fox kits play in Millennium Park's Lurie Garden, Chicago, on May 22, 2023. Photographer: Armando L. Sanchez/Chicago Tribune/Getty Images

Like raccoons and squirrels, foxes are synanthropic species, meaning they tend to live alongside humans and often benefit from our built environment. But conservationists warn that continued urbanization and rising temperatures are making it harder for urban dwellers to thrive in cities. Red foxes, which are native to Illinois, have already been dwindling in numbers around the Chicago area, and sightings have become rare. Its cousin, the gray fox, is even harder to spot. Experts have called for more maintenance of green spaces with covers that can protect the mammals from the heat in the summer, and for restoring native grasslands.

Historic redlining shapes bird diversity

A revelatory study published in October found that systemic racism and inequality in the US has also had a lasting mark on biodiversity. After studying Los Angeles’s bird population, researchers from California State University, Los Angeles, concluded that historically redlined Black neighborhoods in cities tend to have a less diverse population of birds than wealthier and whiter neighborhoods that didn’t face racist home-lending policies in the 1930s.

Expand A flock of seagulls hangs out in the Los Angeles River near downtown Los Angeles. Photographer: Citizens of the Planet/Universal Images Group/Getty Images

The researchers attribute the unequal distribution in part to the lack of tree cover and green space in poorer neighborhoods, which make it harder for them to attract bird species. So while nonwhite communities have a larger population of synanthropic birds like house finches and pigeons that have adapted to denser environments, wealthy neighborhoods attract more forest birds like warblers and woodpeckers.

New York hires a new leader to combat rats

Expand New York City's first “rat czar,” Kathleen Corradi, was appointed by Mayor Eric Adams to fight a relentless rat population. Photographer: Selcuk Acar/Anadolu Agency/Getty Images

In 2015, New York City’s Pizza Rat — a beady-eyed rodent found dragging a slice of pie down the steps of a Manhattan subway station — made a lasting impact in the world of memes. Seven years later, another rat captured the imagination of social media, this time seen on TikTok dragging a doughnut through subway tracks and sharing it with a buddy. The footage sparked jokes about NYC’s dating scene, but is also a reminder of arguably the city’s toughest foe — an animal that has become one of the most resourceful urban exploiters.

NYC hired its first-ever rat czar in April, in its longstanding war against the rodents. The new hire comes as cities across the US face a resurgence of rats following the pandemic, as activity returned to commercial centers and municipal workforces face staffing shortages, including in waste management. Rat experts say populations have not only rebounded but are on the rise in several cities, prompting officials to rethink their rodent mitigation tactics.

Sick raccoons overwhelm Canada’s largest city

NYC’s northerly neighbor Toronto, meanwhile, would benefit from a raccoon czar. The nocturnal critters are both the heroes and villains of Canada’s largest city (even earning themselves their very own video game). Residents are both bemused by their oft-brazen tactics — dumpster diving in broad daylight, browsing aisles at stores, vandalizing gardens and blocking bike lanes — and frustrated by the government’s response to them.

Expand A raccoon climbs along a fence in Toronto. Photographer: Creative Touch Imaging Ltd./Getty Images

This year, Toronto’s government struggled to control an unprecedented distemper outbreak among the furry bandits. Between January and April, the city received more than 3,600 service requests for sick or injured racoons, more than five times the number of cases from the same period last year. A mild winter is partly to blame. And while distemper isn’t transmissible to humans, other diseases that urban pests carry could be.

Neil the seal comes ashore

The year ends with Neil, an elephant seal that’s become the latest internet sensation. Neil came ashore on the Australian island of Tasmania earlier this month as he does throughout the year, and has since galumphed his way into parking lots, people’s front lawns and the hearts of local residents. At 1,300 lb, he’s also wreaking havoc, slapping traffic cones, body slamming parking poles, napping in the middle of the road and picking fights with the police.

Local marine conservationists say the three-year-old seal comes ashore to rest for several weeks after hunting and foraging, and before returning to the sea. Though his bubbly form and comical antics have attracted a lot of onlookers, experts expressed concern that his fame could hurt him (remember Freya the walrus?) and have warned people to keep their distance — both for their safety and for his.