Political polarization has helped make 2023 the biggest off-year for ballot measures in more than a decade in the US, and this November voters across the country will directly decide on measures ranging from abortion rights to affordable housing funds.

Historically, odd numbered years boast fewer such initiatives because turnout tends to be lower than in years with national congressional and presidential elections. But the state and local measures that voters will decide this November offer a window into some of the fights that will animate next year’s major federal, state and local races.

There are 41 statewide ballot measures across eight states for 2023, the most for an odd year since 2007 and higher than an average of 33 over the past decade, according to Ballotpedia, a nonpartisan political encyclopedia website. All but nine will be decided in November, along with a range of city referenda.

Most of the state measures were placed on the ballot by legislators, but this year’s highest-profile questions qualified through the petition process. In a time of growing political divides, citizen-initiated ballot measures offer voters in around half of US states a chance to directly influence public policy, sometimes allowing them to push change that their state leaders have opposed. Once a favored tool of the right, they’ve started to become more central to the strategy of liberal advocates, who have used the initiative process to legalize marijuana, increase minimum wages and expand Medicaid.

“There’s an increased desire by voters to take things to the ballot that aren’t getting proper consideration in their state houses,” said Sarah Walker, the policy and legal advocacy director at the Ballot Initiative Strategy Center, which advocates for progressive referenda. “People are using the tool as a way to achieve policy wins.”

Reproductive Rights

Ohio is home to one of the most closely watched initiatives in the nation. In November, its voters will weigh amending the state constitution to include a right to reproductive freedom, a move that would effectively block a pending ban on abortions at around six weeks of pregnancy. The measure, which comes a year after the US Supreme Court ruled there is no constitutional right to an abortion, is an early test for restrictive reproductive policies in Republican states.

The measure also offers a view into tactics that both governments and other interested parties may use to undermine ballot measures. The Ohio initiative faced two legal challenges from anti-abortion groups aimed at weakening or nixing it altogether. Abortion rights groups also contested the final language for the measure, which was drafted by a majority-Republican ballot board, and includes the phrase “unborn child” rather than “unborn fetus.” A court ruled against them.

For 2024, at least eight states are already mulling abortion-related initiatives, and Maryland has a constitutional amendment enshrining reproductive freedom slated for the ballot. Debates over the language used in the measures, like in Ohio, have started more than a year ahead of the votes and are expected to ramp up over the next year as the 2024 election approaches, said Walker.

“We’re seeing this across the country,” Walker said of efforts to muddy the ballot initiative process. “Ohio’s success is sending a message that there are ways to manipulate the process.”

Tax Debates

National conversations over inequality and how to address the growing housing crisis are animating several public finance-related measures this year. Famously low-tax Texas is weighing measures on one side of that debate: This year, voters will decide whether to preemptively fend off future taxes on wealth, and further slash property taxes.

In contrast, cities like Cincinnati and Santa Fe are voting on proposals to target taxes on the wealthy to fund housing construction for low income residents. Santa Fe’s “mansion” tax measure, levied on home sales of more than $1 million, could raise an estimated $4.5 million a year for an affordable housing trust fund; it could also prove a test case for a similar measure being proposed in Chicago that could make it onto ballots next year.

Jon Whiten, the communications director at the Institute on Taxation and Economic Policy, says that proposed tax cuts like the one in Texas have been fueled by federal investment during the pandemic that may dry up.

“A lot of the states have been able to make new investments in great programs, and cut taxes on top,” he said. “But at some point that equation will sort of fall apart. And then hard choices are going to have to be made again.”

This year, states will also continue to turn to marijuana, tobacco and gambling as potential revenue sources, with questions on the ballot in Ohio, Colorado and Richmond, Virginia.

While next year’s public finance measure landscape is still evolving, Whiten says he expects to see more ballot initiatives on both tax abatement and revenue-raising. “On the one hand, there is a real appetite to make the tax code fairer by taxing those at the top and taxing corporations better,” he said. “And there's going to be a tax-cutting sentiment as well.”

Law Enforcement

As states and localities across the country take steps to crack down on homeless encampments, Spokane, Washington’s election will prompt voters to decide whether to ban camping on public property and near parks, schools or childcare facilities. A Louisiana ballot measure would decide whether to allow local governments to give first responders, including police and emergency services personnel, an additional property tax exemption.

One police reform proposal that didn’t make it to the ballot has already sparked policy change: After activists in Shaker Heights, Ohio, pushed for a measure to reduce racial disparities in traffic stops and expand a mental health response team, the city agreed on a public safety resolution that enacted many of the proposed reforms, and the proposed measure was withdrawn.

Bigger tests of public sentiment around policing could come next March. In San Francisco, Mayor London Breed has proposed a measure for 2024 that would make it easier for police to pursue suspects and use more surveillance technology. And in Atlanta, activists are pushing for a measure that could kill the city’s plans to build a vast police training center in a local forest nicknamed “Cop City.”

2024 and Beyond

So-called “culture war” ballot items failed to catch on in this cycle despite being the focus of Republican legislatures. In Columbia County, Washington, a ballot initiative to close the county’s sole library on account of alleged exposure to offensive books was ruled unconstitutional. Ohio’s highest court also invalidated a proposed measure on banning drag shows in the rural city of Bellefontaine. However, the Ballot Initiative Strategy Center’s Walker said she expected to see more attempts from legislators to get measures that energize a right-wing base, like book bans and drag shows, on the ballot in 2024.

Next year will also bring more kitchen table issues to the fore. Advocates in Missouri, Nebraska and Alaska are petitioning to bring paid sick leave measures to the November 2024 ballot, while Californians might have the chance to weigh in on efforts to make affordable housing production easier and change the approval thresholds for certain taxes.

As ballot initiatives have become more popular, there have been more efforts to reverse their outcomes and to challenge the initiative process itself — something advocacy groups are preparing for.

“We are spending more time, energy and actual money trying to anticipate all the different ways that these ballot measures could be vulnerable than we ever have,” said Alexis Magnan-Callaway, communications and digital strategy director for the Fairness Project, another group that champions ballot measures.

According to Ballotpedia, 52 state measures have already been certified for the 2024 ballot in 23 states; since 2010, an average of 161 measures typically end up in front of voters in even years.

“Reproductive rights have awoken a lot of people to the power of ballot measures, who maybe hadn't considered them before,” said Magnan-Callaway. “Next year is going to be the biggest year yet.”