Hi, Pursuits readers, it’s Lily Girma here, your travel correspondent bringing you industry news and destination updates. Yesterday, we published the first edition of my new column, the Better Travel Bureau, on the business of conscious tourism.

Here’s the plan: to zero in on the ways that a fast-growing, essential industry is racing to course-correct and do better by the guests and destinations it serves.

There’s no stopping the growth. The travel industry is projected to reach $15.5 trillion in revenue by 2033. How will governments account for the deepening impact on destinations and residents, while drawing mindful travelers? How will businesses step up to protect destinations they don’t own but need? Those are the questions I’m interested in.

Consider overtourism: The crowds are back, with no proven solution yet in sight, beyond tourism tax increases and entrance fees to cities such as Venice, as if they were theme parks. Unmanaged crowds ruin destinations for locals and travelers alike, and high visitor numbers don’t necessarily translate into benefits for the local economy. That’s because destinations focus on arrival numbers, while the cost of tourism’s impact often goes unexamined.

State parks in Hawaii are increasingly adopting advance reservations systems to better manage crowds. Photographer: Westend61/Westend61

Amsterdam took a bold step this week, tackling its overcrowding issues with a fresh ban on new hotels. And in the Canary Islands, residents have called for hunger strikes to protest hotel construction, given that more than 30% of locals live in precarious economic conditions, despite rising incoming tourist dollars.

This uneven flow of tourism revenue isn’t new to economies in the Global South, where inequality gaps are stark. Short-term rentals in major cities such as Oaxaca, Mexico, cater to more digital nomads or transplants and continue to threaten local housing prices.

Amid tourism surge, Oaxaca residents resist “Disneylandization.” Photographer: Alejandro Cegarra/Bloomberg

When it comes to ecological impact, tourism is confronting an existential crisis. Extreme weather patterns are changing the appeal of iconic tourism destinations and threatening cultural and natural assets on which the industry and local livelihoods depend—think snowless ski resorts and sargassum-covered Caribbean beaches.

Collectively, tourism activity makes up a sizable 11% of global greenhouse gas emissions, and that’s predicted to double by 2050. Which means it also needs to be a part of the solution.

A surge of sargassum seaweed is changing the beach vacation. Photographer: Juan Mendoza

The good news: A lot of money is at stake, so even though the challenges are enormous, building a more responsible, inclusive tourism industry presents big opportunities. When managed adequately, travel can be a powerful mechanism for preserving culture, reviving biodiversity and protecting wildlife. It provides easier entry for employment than other industries and unlocks vast opportunities for community-driven entrepreneurialism.

Simply put: Prioritizing people and the planet is good business.

AccessibleGo is the first website to tailor bookings for flight, hotel and car rentals for travelers with special needs. Competition is growing fast. Source: AccessibleGO

Take accessible travel, an industry that’s now valued at $58 billion, or the Black consumer market, which spent $109 billion on travel in 2019. There’s also the potential of Indigenous tourism, which is gaining traction; one in four American Indian, Alaska Native and Native Hawaiian-owned companies are in the travel sector, representing a $14 billion industry as of 2021.

My first column covers Brazil’s belated embrace of its Afro-Brazilian heritage and entrepreneurs—which stands to bring substantial revenue to Brazil from US Black travelers, as well as other parts of the diaspora, and perhaps address far-reaching racism in Brazilian society itself. It doesn’t mean there’s not a lot more work to do, but now there’s hope the country and its travel industry are moving in the right direction.

Major strategy shifts such as Brazil’s Afro tourism initiatives are possible only with the right leadership and a collaborative approach. Source: Afrotours

The $10 trillion travel industry is due for a reckoning. In my column, I'll be cutting through the noise and following the money to highlight issues that tourism is facing globally and the wins and innovations addressing them.

It’s called the Better Travel Bureau because, ultimately, we’re here to help you make informed travel decisions and showcase how the choices you make can have a long-lasting impact—positive or negative—on the places and communities you’ll visit. Join me every month for inspiration, action and really cool ways to see the world.



And if there’s something in this space you think I should know about, please don’t hesitate to get in touch.

Connect with Lily on Instagram or via email.



Better travel inspiration

From tourist hot spots to emerging destinations and beloved national parks.

Hippies, Hikers and Luxury Travelers All Agree Sedona Is the Place to Be

The Arizona city might have a reputation for out-there New Age thinking, but it also welcomes vacationers with world-class hiking and indulgent resorts.

Saudi Arabia’s Tourism Potential—and Roadblocks—Revealed in a Posh Desert Hotel

Two and a half years in, Habitas AlUla, the country’s first luxury resort targeting foreigners, shows the challenges and opportunities of travel to Saudi Arabia.

Don’t Let It Flow: Tourists to Spain’s Catalonia May Soon See Water Restrictions in the Dry Season

Spain’s drought-stricken northeastern Catalonia is considering imposing water restrictions on tourists in the driest parts of the region.

Wealth and Glamour Give Way to Gangs and Devastation in Acapulc

The city is still reeling from the impact of Hurricane Otis, which inflicted about $20 billion in damages.

How to Plan an Epic Summer Trip to a National Park

Get insider tips on the best times to visit the most popular parks and where to stay.

Earth Day is on Monday

A look at sustainability solutions and challenges, including aviation, wildlife preservation and construction for the Paris Olympics.

What else I’m thinking about

Restaurants in Washington, DC: Now that the weather is pleasant here in Washington, I’m enjoying catching up with more colleagues over a meal. I’m looking forward to finally eating at some of DC’s trendy restaurants, many of which opened while I was in the Caribbean living the digital nomad life. I’m excited to try the Bazaar by José Andrés and Founding Farmers in the coming weeks.

Tourism’s Climate Apathy: Stefan Gössling, a professor of tourism research at Linnaeus University in Sweden who’s long focused on the intersection of tourism and emissions, said something that I can’t stop thinking about. When asked to identify the most difficult challenges of measuring greenhouse gas emissions, his response was, “The will to do it. Because it’s not difficult to do in principle.”

There you have it, in case, like me, you were wondering why so many destinations, hotels and tourism businesses still don’t have a climate action plan. Gössling’s interview was part of the sustainable tourism destination management course I’m currently enrolled in at Cornell University, which details how to go about creating a climate action plan, from establishing your team to gathering the data from a variety of sources, and even calculating the climate footprint per tourist. The information is out there, folks.

The hotel industry’s big carbon lie. Source: Hotel Marcel

So, you had some questions. …

We call for queries weekly on our Instagram account and via e-mail. Here’s what you were dying to know about this time around.

I’m planning to go to Paris during the Summer Olympics. What’s new on the food and drink scene?



Not that we ever need a reason to visit Paris, but there are plenty if one were looking. There’s the latest Michelin list of the 30 best restaurants in the city. New inductees include Le Gabriel at La Reserve Paris, near the Champs-Élysées, for fusion cuisine from around the world and Le Tout-Paris, in the Cheval Blanc hotel. One of France’s most famous spots, Le Jules Verne on the second floor of the Eiffel Tower, received two stars.

Whether or not any trendy restaurants have reservations left is another matter. Any is better than none, so make them ASAP.

For spur-of-the-moment barhopping, relax at one of Paris’ trending wine bars where you can order a bottle of natural wine, some inexpensive snacks and even ice cream.

The crowd at Giclette, one of the six best natural wine bars in Paris. Photographer: Elin McCoy

I want to stick close to the US this summer. Is anywhere in the Caribbean good or worth it this time of year?

Too bad you didn’t ask about Europe, because we have a whole guide to summer travel coming up. Check back in two weeks, and maybe we’ll sway you.

In the meantime, if you’re open to an alternative from the “real” Caribbean, Bermuda makes a perfect choice. It’s just a little more than a two-hour flight from the East Coast, and you can enjoy the rest of the day beside pink sand and turquoise waters, of which Bermuda has plenty.

How about Playa del Carmen, Mexico? Before you click on, the area has seen an exciting influx of boutique luxury brands that make it well worth considering—such as the Maroma Belmond or the Riviera Maya Edition at Kanai.

You should also keep in mind Caribbean hotel openings this year. Grand Cayman’s Hotel Indigo, set to receive guests starting on May 8, offers a different option away from the bigger box hotels on nearby Seven Mile Beach.

Just remember that summer is no longer slow season in the Caribbean.

Summer has become increasingly popular with tourists seeking a beach getaway to smaller island paradises. Source: Oetker Collection

What’s the latest intel on airports and related perks?

For starters, you’ll want to peek at the most recent world airport ranking from the Skytrax World Airport Awards 2024. It’s always been a tight race between Singapore’s Changi Airport and Hamad International Airport in Doha, Qatar, but this year Qatar took the top spot. The losers include Berlin’s, in the last (100th) spot; Boston’s Logan in the 97th; and New York’s John F. Kennedy in the 93rd.

Still, JFK is likely to shine by 2026. It has some seriously impressive terminal renovations underway worth $19 billion in investment, including two future international terminals (1 and 6). A new survey based on passenger feedback even ranked LaGuardia Airport as the “Best airport in North America” within its weight class (serving 25 million to 40 million passengers annually).

Remember to check your travel credit cart benefits before heading out, so you’ll be sure to have lounge access in case of long layovers or potential delays. It’s likely to be another busy summer of travel no matter where you’re headed.

And if you have a fur baby, Bark Air is offering dedicated flights for dogs from New York to London and Los Angeles, starting at $6,000 one way. Source: Bark Air

New for subscribers: Free article gifting. Bloomberg.com subscribers can now gift as many as five free articles a month to anyone they want. Just look for the "Gift this article" button on stories. (Not a subscriber? Unlock limited access and sign up here.)