Large numbers of people are once again fleeing violence for Europe and the US, and failure to stem the tide is driving up support for the populist right wing on both sides of the Atlantic. Germany last week put checks on its some of its borders, Italy called for a naval blockade of the Mediterranean and a UK cabinet minister said the international treaty that assures refugees protection was no longer fit for purpose. Illegal immigration, said UK Home Secretary Suella Braverman, has become “an existential challenge for the political and cultural institutions of the west.”



Braverman’s speech at the American Enterprise Institute in Washington was unserious, based on fake facts and dog whistling, which is a shame because she was right that irregular migration is reaching a crisis point. Yet the first step in dealing with it is to acknowledge what’s actually happening.



The big fact ignored on the liberal side of this debate is the scale of the economic and political challenge that large, sudden influxes of refugees present, even for rich countries. This is an identity issue, stirring fears in many Americans and Europeans that they are under threat, and no amount of moral finger wagging is going to make that angst go away. The current failure to deal with it honestly is politically dangerous.



Both the victory of Robert Fico — a pro-Russia, anti-immigration, EU-skeptic former prime minster — in Slovakia’s elections at the weekend, and the decision by House Republicans in the US to condition further security aid for Ukraine on a border control bill show the potency of the issue. Elon Musk weighed in too, with a false comparison of US and Ukrainian border issues, in a post to his 158 million followers on X.



On the other side lies denial that Europe in particular needs migrants to supplement a declining workforce and that refugees have to go somewhere, and wealthy nations aren’t exempt. Amid all the noise last week, Greece, which has been in the eye of the Mediterranean refugee storm, said it will consider normalizing the status of 300,000 irregular migrants so they can work legally, because it couldn’t otherwise fill jobs in construction, farming and tourism.



Ever since Syria’s Arab Spring revolt quickly turned into a civil war in 2011, the number of people displaced by violence and persecution around the globe has been booming. By now it’s more than doubled to 108.4 million, according to the UN agency that registers them, the UNHCR. Most — 62.5 million — remain in their countries of origin, often relying on international aid to survive. Another 35.3 million are refugees who fled, and of those 70% stayed in the first country they came to after crossing the border.

That’s why Turkey, a neighbor of Syria, hosts more registered refugees and asylum seekers than any other country, at a little under 4 million. Iran, a neighbor of Afghanistan, hosts 3.4 million. Colombia, next to Venezuela, has about 2.5 million. All of these are low- or middle-income economies.



The number of refugees traveling farther to reach wealthier countries is much smaller, at about 10% of those displaced. But they’re unevenly distributed. (Germany has a lot more in per capita and absolute terms than the UK and France.) According to an annual forecast by the Danish Refugee Council, there will be a further 5.4 million forcibly displaced humans on the planet by the end of 2024, so in excess of 113 million in total, with about 11 million of them relocated to more distant, richer nations.