In this Washington Edition special, Bloomberg Businessweek columnist Joshua Green unpacks how New Hampshire may be Nikki Haley’s last chance to woo voters. The regular newsletter returns tomorrow afternoon. Sign up here and follow us at @bpolitics. Email our editors here.

Last Call for Nikki Haley

Todays New Hampshire primary will give former South Carolina Governor Nikki Haley the opportunity she’s craved since launching her GOP presidential campaign last year: a one-on-one showdown with Donald Trump.

After Bloomberg News broke the word on Sunday that Florida Governor Ron DeSantis was quitting the race, Haley is the last major challenger standing.

But so far there’s little sign Granite State voters are rallying behind her. At campaign stops and in polls, local enthusiasm palpably tilts toward Trump. This morning’s final Suffolk University tracking poll shows Trump beating Haley 60% to 38%.

“Her first battle was outlasting everyone else,” said Jim Merrill, a veteran Republican strategist in New Hampshire. “But now she’s got a mountain to scale.”

Strategists in both camps agree that the only path for a Haley upset is a massive turnout in the Republican race that’s heavy on “undeclared” voters, though many may cast their ballot for Trump. Here, Haley has a glimmer of hope. New Hampshire Secretary of State David Scanlan is predicting a record 322,000 voters will cast ballots for Republicans tonight, eclipsing the 287,000 who turned out the first time Trump was on the ballot in 2016.

Demographically, no state lines up better for Haley than New Hampshire, which is heavy on the moderate, secular and college-educated voters who polls show are her strongest supporters, while containing relatively few of the evangelical conservatives who are the staunchest backers of Trump.

But in a worrisome sign for Haley, it’s become increasingly clear that supporters of DeSantis, Tim Scott, Vivek Ramaswamy and Doug Burgum generally haven’t gravitated to her campaign. Instead, on Monday night, Scott, Ramaswamy and Burgum appeared at a New Hampshire rally with Trump.

For the last several days, Haley surrogates like New Hampshire Governor John Sununu have worked to lower expectations, arguing that she doesn’t need to win tonight to remain viable. This morning, Haley’s campaign manager issued a public memo insisting “everyone should take a deep breath” and declaring that “we aren’t going anywhere.”

In politics, that doesn't signify confidence. It’s a recognition that Haley might need a miracle to win New Hampshire — and if she doesn't, a compelling argument for why her campaign should carry on.

Key Reading:

Watch & Listen

Today on Bloomberg Television's new Balance of Power early edition at 1 p.m., hosts Joe Mathieu and Kailey Leinz interviewed Frank Luntz, CEO of consulting firm Luntz Global Partners, about Trump's New Hampshire lead. On the program at 5 p.m., they'll talk to New Hampshire political insiders Steve Duprey and Jennifer Horn.

On the Big Take podcast, Bloomberg's Galit Altstein discusses how Israel’s war in Gaza is hurting its own economy. Listen on iHeart, Apple Podcasts and Spotify.

Chart of the Day

It's not just registered Republicans voting in New Hampshire's presidential primary between Donald Trump and Nikki Haley on Tuesday. Independents— known as "undeclared" voters in the Granite State— can vote in either party's primary. And when one side doesn't have a competitive race, as is the case this year with President Joe Biden and the Democrats, those undeclared voters tend to vote for the party where the action is. That could help boost Republican votes. New Hampshire Secretary of State David Scanlan is projecting that 322,000 voters will take a Republican ballot— almost 12% more than 2016. Americans for Prosperity Action, a super PAC supporting Haley, thinks it will be even higher. — Gregory Korte

What’s Next

The Federal Election Commission’s year-end deadline for reports from federal candidates, party committees and super PACs is Jan. 31.

Caucuses in Nevada and Virgin Islands will be held Feb. 8

The South Carolina primary is Feb. 24

The Super Tuesday round of 15 state primaries is March 5.

More From Bloomberg

And sign up for more Bloomberg newsletters at Bloomberg.com.