I’m Chris Anstey, a senior economics editor in Boston, and today we’re looking at the latest update on US inflation. Send us feedback and tips to ecodaily@bloomberg.net or get in touch on X via @economics. And if you aren’t yet signed up to receive this newsletter, you can do so here.

Top Stories

The UK’s weaker-than-expected inflation data provide relief for the BOE.

The yen’s rapid fall against the dollar adds a further complication for the BOJ as it considers the best timing for its first rate hike since 2007.

US inflation data erased the last remnants of a global bond rally that started in December.

Valentine Snub

A day before Valentine’s Day, the January report on US consumer prices was hardly a sweetheart set of data. While some economists cautioned that the first month of the year can be a bit of an anomaly — incorporating one-off annual price hikes — there were underlying elements of concern.

The biggest driver for the monthly gain in the index came from housing costs. The narrative for quite some time now, including from Federal Reserve policymakers, has been not to worry so much about that, because of the year-or-so delay between rents coming down and the new data getting incorporated into the inflation measure.

Except, that component is proving exceptionally stubborn. So-called owners equivalent rent (OER) climbed 0.6% from December, the biggest gain in nine months. Overall, the CPI was up 0.3%, with the core gauge, excluding food and energy, up 0.4%. That left core inflation holding at 3.9% year-on-year, rather than coming down as economists had thought.

“We and the Fed continue to expect that OER will cool but we will have to see that expectation — which has not materialized to date — validated in the data,” said Krishna Guha, head of global policy and central bank strategy at Evercore ISI.

Trouble is, there’s a structural component to those high housing costs. For years after the US housing meltdown more than a decade and a half ago, residential construction was muted as the industry reeled from the burst property bubble. Even by the late ‘teens, residential fixed investment remained notably below its pre-crisis share of the economy, as seen below.

That means a whole lot of housing stock that would have otherwise been around today, isn’t. And that’s pushing prices up, even apart from cyclical factors such as higher mortgage rates. (It’s also played into the angst over the numbers of migrants, amid limited housing capacity.)

Services such as transportation and medical care also pushed up prices last month, with higher wages seen as a factor there. With the job market still relatively strong at this point, labor costs continue to rise — the Atlanta Fed tracker showed a 5% gain in January, after a 5.2% pace in December.

“With the broad wage data showing signs of only gradual disinflation,” core services inflation excluding housing is unlikely to see a substantial slowdown in the near term, Barclays Plc economists including Pooja Sriram wrote in a note Tuesday.

As inflation kicked the year off at a faster pace than expected, the Barclays team revised up its projection for the year, expecting the CPI in December to be 3% higher than a year before — up from a previous 2.8% call.

For Fed Chair Jerome Powell, the figures suggest that policymakers’ job remains unfinished, pushing out the time when they can lower interest rates from the highest in more than two decades.

For President Joe Biden, the continuing climb in prices risks sustaining voter concerns about the state of the US economy, for all its strong growth and continued job gains. With the election less than nine months away, few will be hoping for a turn in price data in coming months more than he.

The Best of Bloomberg Economics

The ECB needs additional evidence that inflation is returning to its goal before it can start cutting rates, Vice President Luis de Guindos says.

Prime Minister Narendra Modi struck a deal with the UAE to continue working on a trade corridor linking India via the Middle East to Europe.

Russia is relying on thousands of often-unwittingly recruited workers from neighboring countries to undertake the sprawling multi-billion-dollar reconstruction in the occupied territories of Ukraine.

Economic weakness in Germany hit European Union’s east in the fourth quarter as Romania unexpectedly contracted and Hungary and Poland stagnated on faltering industrial production.

Florida’s southwestern coast — long one of America’s fastest-growing regions — is losing some of its boomtown swagger as a home-insurance crisis and other soaring costs make homes unaffordable.

Need-to-Know Research

Global manufacturing has troughed and is set to pick up as growth remains resilient and central banks cut interest rates, according to Goldman Sachs.

But that may be where the good news ends. The recovery will be underwhelming by historical standards, a pull back in goods demand may weigh on activity, and inventories remain elevated, economists including Joseph Briggs and Devesh Kodnani wrote in a note.

On #EconX

A former White House chief economist says:

Expand

Read more reactions on X

More from Bloomberg

Enjoy Economics Daily?

Read more economic stories

Follow us @economics

Plus, here are some newsletters we think you might like