Eight years ago, in January 2016, one of us published a piece proclaiming that we lived in a “20% world.” Bookmakers were offering punters a 1-in-5 chance of Donald Trump winning the US presidency that November. There were similar odds on three other “unthinkables”: Britain voting to leave the European Union; the extreme left-winger Jeremy Corbyn being elected Britain’s prime minister; and Marine Le Pen ascending to the French presidency.

The piece warned that, thanks to the enormous resentment among voters across the West, the chance of at least one of these unthinkables taking place was dangerously high.

As an exercise in political soothsaying, this proved woefully accurate. By the end of 2016, Britain was heading out of the EU and Trump was heading into the White House. Though Le Pen lost two presidential runoffs against Emmanuel Macron, in 2017 and 2022, she remains a formidable force in France. Of the 2016 unthinkables, only Corbyn has been truly consigned to the landfill of history.

Look at the world in 2024 and it is almost a mirror image of 2016: The long-shot unthinkables from eight years ago are now the firm favorites, or even just the accepted status quo.

Bookmakers give Trump a 40% chance of winning November’s presidential election. His closest rival, Joe Biden, is an 81-year-old prone to gaffes and memory lapses, exactly the rival that Trump would want in the grueling marathon that is a modern presidential race. The rest of the pack — led by Nikki Haley on the Republican side and Gavin Newsom on the Democratic one — have a 1-in-10 chance of winning. The odds of Britain rejoining the EU before 2026 are 1 in 7 — lower than the chances of the country leaving in 2016.

In this year of elections, voters in countries representing 41% of the world’s population will go to the polls — and in a terrifying number of cases, candidates who would have been seen as extremist wild cards in 2016 look the strongest. Geert Wilders set the tone by winning the largest number of seats in the Dutch elections in November, giving him first dibs at forming a government. Le Pen is currently the likeliest to succeed Macron in 2027, with nervousness about her party’s extremism abating. Writing in Foreign Policy, John Kampfner predicts that right-wing populism “is set to sweep the West in 2024,” with likely advances in the European Parliament, Austria, Portugal and Germany, where the hard-right Alternative for Germany party is expected to do well.

Back in 2016, the world was a remarkably peaceful place, with the war against terrorism winding down and China largely seen as a trading partner. Since then the cold war between Washington and Beijing has escalated, even as the West must now contend with two red-hot wars.

The Ukraine-Russia war looks set to grind on, with the Russians dug into their positions and President Vladimir Putin waiting for the West to lose interest (or elect Trump). In Gaza, the many-headed hydra that is Hamas is likely to grow yet more heads as the Israeli bombardment continues, killing civilians in their thousands as well as fighters, and leaving the territory a wasteland. The chances of Iran entering the conflict are increasing as its proxies in Lebanon exchange missiles with Israel. The assassination of Saleh Al-Arouri, a leading Hamas official, in Beirut will not calm things down.

The Israeli assault on Gaza has split the democratic world, provoking massive pro-Palestinian demonstrations in many Western capitals and a growing sense of nervousness among the Jewish diaspora. Even in the United States, where the establishment is still firmly behind Israel, a split is emerging between Young and Old reminiscent of divisions from the Vietnam War.

For the truly pessimistic, however, there is always Taiwan. China has increased both its incursions into the skies and waters around Taiwan and its military spending (it now has a bigger navy than the US), even as American politics has devolved into a contest about who can sound tougher on Beijing. Analysts view Lai Ching-te as the favorite to win the Taiwanese election later this month. Beijing has denounced him as a “splittist” and warned that a vote for Lai increases the chances of war. Lai’s supporters claim that Xi Jinping is hellbent on taking Taiwan by force.

A frightening list. But are there reasons to hope that the pundits are as wrong today as they were in 2016? Perhaps. In fact, allow yourself to dream a little, and an optimistic case emerges. Call it the 10% world.

One reason for optimism is that in many parts of the West, voters have now had some experience of populism — and discovered that the populists are even worse than the people they railed against. Back in 2016, voters in America could tell themselves that, although Trump was obviously a bounder, he was also a businessman who could get things to work. Yet once in power, the Trump administration was characterized not just by extremism (including an assault by Trump supporters on the Capitol) but also by a level of incompetence that created a Keystone Cops atmosphere in the White House.

Brexit has proved to be such a universally acknowledged failure that even European populists have dropped all talk of Frexit or its various equivalents. Back in 2016, the Leave campaign promised that taking back control would make Britons richer, reduce immigration and provide funds for the National Health Service; instead, the British economy has stagnated, the number of migrants has risen and NHS waiting lists have metastasized. The government reached a shambolic nadir first under Boris Johnson, who was forced to resign because his MPs wouldn’t serve under him anymore, and then Liz Truss, who only lasted 49 days in office. A recent poll of 2,000 voters showed that only 22% of Britons believe that Brexit has been good for the country, compared with 50% thinking it was bad. Whereas the 2019 election offered Britain a choice between a crypto-communist (Corbyn) and a clownish populist (Johnson), the next British election will be fought between two sensible (some might say boring) centrists, Rishi Sunak and Keir Starmer.

Other countries that led the charge toward populism are also moving back to center. Greece, which opted in 2015 for Alexis Tsipras, the wild man of the Aegean, has just reelected its technocratic prime minister, Kyriakos Mitsotakis, to another term. In October, Poland dumped the deeply weird Law and Justice Party that had ruled since 2015.

Expand Giorgia Meloni, a centrist in disguise. Photographer: Bloomberg/Bloomberg

Nowadays, despite the appeal of Trump, most successful populists tend to be centrists in disguise. In Italy, Giorgia Meloni has governed more sensibly than Silvio Berlusconi did (let alone Benito Mussolini, to whom she was likened when she was elected in 2022). One of the people she has listened to most on the economy has been the technocrat supreme, Mario Draghi. In India, the Hindu nationalist Narendra Modi will probably win a third term as prime minister this spring — but only because his government has focused on producing prosperity more than marginalizing Muslims, and the opposition Congress Party remains a dynastic mess. In Taiwan, even if Lai wins, his party will only get around 40% of the vote; compromise with China is more likely than not.

So, there are good reasons for thinking that 2024 will not be as bad as the list of “probablies” first implies. And one or two good things might happen if several events click into place.

Start with Britain. Imagine that Labour wins the election comfortably, hardly an unlikely outcome. Starmer has the advantage of a disciplined party, hungry for power after more than a decade in the wilderness, while Sunak struggles to hold together a party dominated by the sort of people who believe that Brexit has not worked only because it has not been applied enthusiastically enough.

Starmer has a justified reputation as a cautious trimmer, but in power, his two biggest challenges would be to deliver economic growth and to negotiate a better relationship with Britain’s largest trading partner, the EU. The obvious way to achieve both is to reenter some version of the EU’s single market or the Customs Union. This would deliver a quick boost to the economy, buy goodwill with the commercial classes who are fed up with filling out forms and queueing at airports, and have the bonus of driving the already maddened Tories madder still. With Sunak out of the way, they would have the chance to choose their version of Corbyn — like Suella Braverman or perhaps Nigel Farage.

In the US, the 10% play is simply a president not named Trump or Biden. In a more functional political system, that might already have happened. Polls show most Americans want somebody other than these two aged bruisers (at 77, Trump is only four years younger than Biden). The problem is that America’s system combines the worst features of both partisanship and plutocracy: Trump has a commanding lead among the hardcore conservatives who dominate the Republican primaries while, as a sitting president, Biden controls the money-and-patronage machine that is the modern Democratic Party.

That logic will likely seem even more ineluctable with the Iowa caucuses on Jan. 15, when the betting markets think a Trump victory is assured. But the 10% optimist can still look for more benign possibilities. Perhaps Haley will do better in New Hampshire. Surely Trump will eventually be tripped up by his many judicial entanglements, or just make himself so unpopular to White suburban women and other swing voters that his pusillanimous party finally gets rid of him. And surely Democratic insiders — or even Jill Biden — will realize that Joe has earned a rest. In terms of laws passed, Biden has already proved to be a surprisingly consequential president — much more than Barack Obama. What better way to end a storied political career than to retire with dignity?

Expand This re-run doesn’t need to happen. (Photo by Morry Gash-Pool/Getty Images) Photographer: Pool/Getty Images North America

Once one of these two goes, the other is likely to go as well. Replace Trump with, say, Haley and the polls show you can stick a fork in Biden. A host of Democrats, including California’s Newsom, are making a big show of “supporting Joe” while also making it clear they can do things he can’t — like debate right-wing hard-liners on Fox. There’s even the possibility of an all-female contest — with Haley, the former governor of South Carolina, battling the current governor of Michigan, Gretchen Whitmer.

There is even perhaps a 10% chance of something good emerging from the horrors of the Middle East. The few occasions when the peace process has lurched forward have nearly always been after terrible bloodshed. The bloodshed has been even more terrible this time, but moderates on both sides now understand that the previous status quo — an isolated Gaza ruled by genocidal Hamas terrorists while Israel built settlements on the West Bank and tried to do deals with other Arab states — is unsustainable.

In the end, there is no real alternative to the two-state solution. But as everybody agrees, that requires a change of leadership. On the Israeli side, that is probable. Even before the gruesome Hamas attacks, a broad coalition of Israelis, stretching from secular progressives to Israel Defense Forces generals, was protesting against Benjamin Netanyahu, the settlement-building prime minister, and his attempts to weaken the judiciary, in part so he could escape prosecution. Polls suggest that Israelis are determined to replace Netanyahu when the current assault on Gaza ends, not only because he is ethically compromised but also because the terror of Oct. 7 happened on his watch.

But any new leader in Israel will be hard-pressed to find a Palestinian counterpart with whom he or she could do a deal. With luck, the assault on Gaza will remove the current vile Hamas leadership, but the death toll has hardly helped the cause of moderate Palestinians. The Fatah leadership on the West Bank is congenitally corrupt and incompetent. One unifying but controversial candidate could be Marwan Barghouti, originally a supporter of the peace process but now in an Israeli prison for his role in terrorist attacks during the Second Intifada. He has “blood on his hands,” but so did the men who made peace in Northern Ireland and South Africa.

A final 10% play that really would count as an optimistic option is that one of the world’s dictatorships will fall. For all the evidence of democracy’s frailty, it's worth remembering that strongmen put such an emphasis on strength for a reason: because they are frightened of the masses and even more frightened of the people around them. Their power is as brittle as it is illegitimate. From time immemorial, the rule of strongmen has usually ended in collapse.

Putin survived a small armed rebellion last year. The mullahs in Iran also had a scare. The Kims in North Korea have impoverished their people for years. In Asia, as people have grown richer, authoritarian regimes have usually given way to democracies — something to bear in mind when it comes to Vietnam, Myanmar or even one day China. As the economist Herb Stein was fond of pointing out, “if something cannot go on forever, it will stop.”

Expand History’s odds run against them. Photographer: VLADIMIR SMIRNOV/AFP via Getty Images

So in 12 months, in the 10% world, we may be looking back on a surprisingly good year: America will be celebrating its first female president; Trump and Netanyahu will be spending more time with their lawyers; the US and China will be devoting more time to mending their economic relationship and less to shadowboxing over Taiwan; Starmer will have begun negotiations with the EU; the Israelis and Palestinians will be talking to each other seriously, for the first time in decades; and one or another of the world’s nastier dictatorships will have fallen.

Are these unthinkables less likely than Trump and the Brexiters triumphing in 2016? Sadly, yes. That is why it’s a 10% world rather than a 20% world. But somehow and somewhere, something good will happen in 2024 — and, just possibly, several good things might happen in rapid succession.