For years, Middle East headlines have been dominated by Gulf Arab nations formalizing ties with Israel. There’s been talk of business, trade, investment. It’s no longer unusual to hear Hebrew spoken in Dubai’s malls or see Israeli ministers at glitzy events.

The allure of a Middle East free of conflict and focused on prosperity was intoxicating. And it was all too tempting to reach for it while leaving unresolved the issue of Palestine, whose quest for statehood shaped war and peace in the region for decades.

This weekend’s unprecedented attack on Israel by the Gaza-based militant group Hamas, catapulted the Palestinian issue back to the center of attention. And the response from Persian Gulf states suggests the Middle East hasn’t changed as much as Israel might have hoped.

The most notable response came from Saudi Arabia, which is negotiating a three-way deal that would see it formalize ties with Israel in return for US security guarantees. While global leaders rushed to condemn the attack and back Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu’s resolve to destroy Hamas, Saudi Arabia placed the blame squarely on Israel and urged the international community to reactivate talks for a two-state solution.

“The Kingdom recalls its repeated warnings of the dangers of the explosion of the situation as a result of the continued occupation, the deprivation of the Palestinian people of their legitimate rights,” the Saudi foreign ministry said in a statement.



The United Arab Emirates, one of two Gulf countries to sign the Abraham Accords with Israel in 2020, offered condolences for the Israeli civilians targeted. But it stopped short of condemning Hamas outright, calling instead for a deescalation and return to negotiations for a final settlement.

Even China, which helped broker Saudi Arabia’s tentative rapprochement with Hamas sponsor Iran, blamed the violence on the stalled peace process and reiterated its support for a Palestinian state as the fundamental way to end the conflict.



Also Read: Schumer Confronts Xi on Israel-Hamas Statement in Rare Meeting

A permanent member of the UN Security Council, China has been increasingly vocal on Israeli-Palestinian issues as it tries to raise its diplomatic profile in the Middle East. President Xi Jinping even offered in June to host a peace conference and facilitate talks, stepping into a role that Western powers have abrogated with disastrous effect.

Expand Benjamin Netanyahu, Israel's prime minister Photographer: Kobi Wolf/Bloomberg

Humiliated by his country’s biggest security failure since the 1973 Arab-Israeli War, Netanyahu will be under enormous pressure to avenge slain Israelis and take the war to Iran’s proxies. His government includes far-right politicians who oppose giving up any land to Palestinians to end the conflict.

But the carefully-worded statements from the Gulf reflect worries that a broader escalation with Iran will roil a region key to global oil supplies and make it harder to justify relations with Israel to populations that remain sympathetic to the Palestinians.

Related Coverage:

Chart of the Week

Saudi Arabia’s new budget math is once more entrenching its reliance on high oil prices.

Following the first surplus in nearly a decade last year, a costly economic makeover under Crown Prince Mohammed bin Salman has prompted a rewrite of projections that now assume deficits until at least 2026. It’s a stark change from plans to keep the budget in the black for years to come.

Related Coverage:

The Slant

The biggest surprise in Hamas’s massive attack on Israel is that it was a surprise, writes Marc Champion. While Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu set out a good framework to respond, he needs a new cabinet to execute it.

Need to Know

Volatility: Oil prices surged after a shock attack on Israel by Hamas brought renewed instability to the Middle East, with US futures at one point topping $87 a barrel. The shekel slid 2% despite an intervention by the country’s central bank, and Israeli stocks extended losses.



A downgrade and a warning: Moody’s Investors Service downgraded Egypt’s credit score amid what the ratings firm called “increasingly constrained” policy options to rebalance the economy without aggravating social risks. Adding to the jitters, the International Monetary Fund's Managing Director, Kristalina Georgieva, told Bloomberg Egypt will “bleed” precious reserves unless it devalues its currency again.

Expand Kristalina Georgieva, managing director of the IMF. Photographer: Chris J. Ratcliffe/Bloomberg

Also Read: Egypt's President Sisi to Run Again as Economic Crisis Deepens

Complex technicalities: Saudi Arabia’s high-stakes bid to join the exclusive club of nuclear fuel-manufacturing nations faces significant barriers that could prove tough for President Joe Biden to clear before next year’s election.

61.5% inflation: Price rises in Turkey accelerated as higher energy costs complicate efforts to contain domestic demand with jumbo interest-rate hikes.

Trade route: Abu Dhabi wealth fund ADQ and Turkey are in talks to build a railway over Istanbul’s Bosphorus strait as part of a planned trade corridor linking Europe to the Middle East and Asia.

IPO demand: Cargo firm SAL Saudi Logistics received orders worth $49 billion for its $678 million initial public offering, which is set to be the kingdom’s second-largest this year. Over in Oman, the $771 million offering of OQ Gas Networks is likely to price at the top of a marketed range, setting it on track to be the country’s biggest listing on record.

Also Read: Dubai Party Hotel Operator FIVE Plans IPO in City in 2025

Building boom: Saudi Arabia is expected to spend more than $175 billion annually on industrial and mega projects between 2025 and 2028 as the kingdom’s construction boom kicks into full gear, according to McKinsey.



Syria Tensions: Turkey called on the US to stop working with Kurdish YPG militants in Syria, vowing to maintain its cross-border offensives against America’s Kurdish allies in Syria after the US shot down a Turkish drone in the region.



Sports push: Saudi Arabia will bid for the men’s football World Cup in 2034 to add to its slate of high-profile sporting events. Meanwhile, the end of year deadline for the PGA Tour and Saudi-backed LIV to finalize their merger is likely to be pushed back as US regulators dig their heels in. And the NBA is open to potential investments from Gulf states, a senior official said.

"Extraordinary run": Dubai cemented its status as the world’s busiest market for luxury homes with buyers pouring $1.59 billion into high end properties during the third quarter, according to Knight Frank.

Also Read: Dubai's Hottest Restaurants Are Infiltrating Cities Worldwide

Nobel Peace Prize: Jailed Iranian activist Narges Mohammadi was awarded the prize for her fight against the oppression of women and her efforts to promote human rights and freedom.

Expand Narges Mohammadi in 2007. Photographer: Behrouz Mehri/Getty Images

Final Word

Yoni Asher last spoke to his wife on Saturday morning, when she called from her mother’s home in southern Israel near the Gaza border. “She told me terrorists had infiltrated the home,” he said. “The phone got disconnected.”

He last saw her later in the day — in a video circulating online. She and their daughters, 3 and 5 years old, were huddled with others on a flatbed in the back of a vehicle. Men with guns ushered them off.

Expand Doron Asher Katz and her two daughters, 3 and 5, were identified by her husband in a video showing hostages taken by Hamas. Source: Yoni Asher

Asher’s wife, Doron Asher Katz, 34, is one of an unknown number of Israelis who have been captured and presumed held hostage after an unprecedented invasion by Hamas militants of southern Israel, taking control of multiple communities and at least two military camps, and killing hundreds. Videos posted online show armed men marching or dragging men and women through the streets, some elderly, some bloodied.

Israeli authorities have responded with force in Gaza, bombing buildings and killing at least 436 people, including 91 children and 61 women, according to Gaza’s health ministry.



On Monday morning, Israel was still trying to regain control of seven or eight places, IDF spokesman Richard Hecht said. The hostage taking has struck a particularly emotional nerve in Israel and makes the country’s response more complicated — and, potentially, more deadly. Israeli military forces have been slowed by the presence of hostages and missing civilians, Hecht said.