Hello and welcome to Bloomberg’s weekly design digest. I’m Kriston Capps , staff writer and editor for Bloomberg CityLab, and your guide to the world of architecture and the people who build things.

This week New York got a glimpse of what housing for 1 million new residents would look like and Frank Gehry sat down with El País. Sign up to keep up: Subscribe to get this newsletter every Sunday

Expand Salt Lake City’s basketball arena, which was renamed the Delta Center in 2023. Photographer: Garrett Ellwood/NBAE via Getty Images

The Point of the Mountain is more of a plan than a place. Currently it is the site of the former Utah State Prison, located outside of Salt Lake City in Draper, Utah. Possibilities floated for rethinking this 600-plus-acre area include mixed-use development with a major park and an extension of Utah’s “Silicon Slopes” tech sector.

Plans for the Point might also include uprooting the Utah Jazz, the only professional sports team in Salt Lake City proper (men’s and women’s soccer teams play in nearby Sandy, Utah). The Salt Lake Tribune reported in December that the team’s owners had closed-door meetings with the state land authority behind the Point about relocating from the downtown Delta Center to a new arena in Draper — some 20 miles away from Salt Lake City.

Expand A view of the American Airlines Center’s south entrance ahead of a Kings-Mavericks game on April 5, 2023, in Dallas. Photographer: John Rivera/Icon Sportswire via Getty Images

The Dallas Mavericks may also leave their downtown(-ish) arena. Owner Mark Cuban announced in November that he’s selling his majority stake to families with ties to the hotel and casino industry and said he would consider a move to a new stadium, although still within city limits.

These reports follow the news out of Washington, DC, that the owner of the Washington Wizards and Capitals — the city’s professional basketball and hockey teams — aims to move them to a new arena that will anchor an entertainment district in suburban Alexandria, Virginia.

The parallels are striking: Reports on all three potential arena moves point to the allure of mega real estate development. In Dallas, the push is reportedly predicated on building a casino-resort. The Utah Jazz owners are looking to the Battery Atlanta, the suburban entertainment district anchored by Truist Park, as a model. The Tribune even hints at a possible alternative destination in “Utah City,” a 700-acre plot in Vineyard, Utah — twice as far away from Salt Lake City as the Point of the Mountain.

Officials in Dallas and Salt Lake City are now reluctantly weighing ways to keep the home teams at home. As officials in DC have already learned, subsidizing an arena renovation isn’t enough: Now leaders in Dallas and Salt Lake are talking about how to offer the same prospect for a sports-entertainment district to compete with the suburbs or exurbs.

This is starting to look like a race by team owners from cities to the suburbs, an about-face from the downtown arena era.

It’s a race that cities stand to lose: They simply can’t compete with the suburbs and exurbs for cheap land, and cities will have to fill the holes left behind in struggling downtowns. It’s a bet that taxpayers will lose: The Potomac Yard move will cost Virginia and Alexandria residents an estimated $1.3 billion, and the government is unlikely to recoup that investment. And it’s a loss for sports fans: The communities that sustain teams cannot simply follow them out of town to arenas far removed from transit, especially if those fans feel left behind.

Business of buildings

Over the last half-century, the architecture and planning firm Cooper Robertson has played an enormous role in transforming New York. The firm created the master plan for Battery Park City, designed the urban framework for Hudson Yards and developed parcels along the Greenpoint and Williamsburg waterfronts in Brooklyn. Donald Clinton, who retired as partner in December after more than 30 years at Cooper Robertson, talks about his experience working on mega-developments in New York and beyond.

Design stories we’re writing

The site Black-Owned Brooklyn shines a light on businesses across the borough, making it a destination for stories about Brooklyn’s culture, history and changing urban landscape. Ariel Felton spoke to Cynthia Gordy Giwa and Tayo Giwa, the site’s proprietors, who describe it as Zora Neale Hurston’s Negro Motorist Green Book for the gentrification era.

Plans for the 2024 Summer Olympics are taking shape, and iconic Paris landmarks will soon be venues for the Games. The Seine? Swimming. The Eiffel Tower? Volleyball. The Place de la Concorde? Breakdancing.

Design stories we’re reading

Speaking of Paris, thousands of residents are rallying against a plan for contemporary stained-glass windows in Notre Dame. ( The Guardian)

The most active architecture firm in New York in 2023 completed 60 projects. ( The Real Deal)

Alex Bozikovic visits the Buffalo AKG Art Museum, formerly the Albright-Knox, and comes away impressed. ( The Globe and Mail)

The Tenement Museum plans to feature the 1860s apartment of a Black coachman as an exhibit. ( The New York Times)

John King remembers San Francisco preservationist Gee Gee Platt. ( San Francisco Chronicle)

Tony Bologna, an architect with a major footprint in Memphis, has died. ( Daily Memphian)

More from Bloomberg

Economics Daily for what the changing landscape means for policy makers, investors and you

Green Daily for the latest in climate news, zero-emission tech and green finance

Hyperdrive for expert insight into the future of cars

Paris Edition for making sense of what's happening in the city and what's next for French business

Work Shift for exclusive insight and data on the future of work

Explore all Bloomberg newsletters at Bloomberg.com.