The following is an adapted excerpt from Fragile Neighborhoods: Repairing America One Zip Code at a Time , out this month from Little, Brown Spark.

When people learn that my professional specialty is fragile states, they want to know: Isn’t America fragile too?

They’ll cite the divisive 2020 presidential election and its deadly aftermath at the US Capitol, police shootings of unarmed Black men, the Centers for Disease Control’s muddled messaging and testing strategy during Covid-19, and the fact that no one can seem to agree on what constitutes a truthful source of news.

My answer? Yes, the US is fragile, but not as a state. Our government is democratically elected and stable, our institutions function comparatively well, and our dynamic business sector makes day-to-day living more comfortable than almost anywhere on earth. Our advances in science and our pioneering of new technology are the envy of the world. We receive the largest number of immigrants from across the globe, and remain a beacon for people seeking a better life. As a state, we’re doing a lot right.

It’s American society that is in trouble — from gun violence in Baltimore to teens committing suicide in Palo Alto to the opioid crisis in Appalachia. Our families and communities suffer from social problems that shock the rest of the world, and ought to shock us: family disintegration, homelessness, school shootings, racial animosity, skyrocketing rates of loneliness and depression, and deaths of despair — alcoholism, drug abuse and suicide. No country in history has had such material wealth alongside such unprecedented social decay. As Anne Case, who with fellow Princeton University professor Angus Deaton sounded the alarm on rising deaths of despair, asks, “Why are people killing themselves in these ways in the United States, but not in other rich countries?”

Our prosperity as a nation doesn’t seem to have improved our well-being. If anything, it has left millions of people and families feeling more alienated and discontented than ever.

The social decay we are experiencing in neighborhoods across America is unlike anything I have seen elsewhere — in even the poorest places.

I’ve had the opportunity to work with organizations such as the World Bank and the US State Department on the front line of efforts to prevent violent conflict and government collapse in some of the most fragile states on the planet: places like Nigeria, Colombia, Libya, and Yemen. As a result, I’ve had a front-row seat to the problems that plague dozens of different countries on almost every continent. This broad experience has sensitized me to the deep, often invisible dynamics that underpin societies and shape the choices people in them make. When we consider two places like Afghanistan and Ukraine and wonder why one government collapses in the face of an existential threat while the other rallies its citizens to mount a bold and spirited defense, it’s tempting to look to politics for answers.

Instead, I look at societal dynamics — the strength of the social glue, the nature of relationships across groups, and the role of social institutions — to explain the differences.

Whereas once social institutions and volunteer organizations drew people from across the socioeconomic spectrum and proliferated in every corner of our vast country, “national public life is now dominated by professionally managed advocacy groups” rather than groups of concerned citizens. “And at the state and local levels ‘voluntary groups’ are, more often than not,” writes sociologist and political scientist Theda Skocpol, “nonprofit institutions through which paid employees deliver services and coordinate occasional voluntary projects.” Meanwhile, in 2018 (the latest year for which comprehensive data is available), just 49.6% of US households made a charitable contribution — a drop of almost 17 percentage points from 2000.

The social decay we are experiencing in neighborhoods across America is unlike anything I have seen elsewhere — in even the poorest places. And it affects not only our domestic conditions, but also our foreign policy, because it gives our geopolitical rivals — China in particular — leverage to argue that their authoritarian systems are better than our own. What forces are at work in the United States that create this exceptional social poverty?

In the US, the relationships that bind us to each other are weak, even disintegrating, making Americans some of the most depressed, anxious, addicted, alienated, and untethered people in the world.

While our popular culture tends to portray each of us as a fully autonomous individual in control of his or her own destiny, social science observes that this is far from true. Each of us is embedded in circles of relationships and institutions that shape everything from our psychology and beliefs to how we treat each other and what life choices we have and make. Such constraints may seem limiting at times, but are empowering when they enable a positive social dynamic.

In America, we tend to think about community as a chain of individual relationships or connections we can choose to acquire through one-on-one friendships, speaking to colleagues in the workplace, or participation in a social movement. Yet none of these “chosen” connections constitute anything like a real community, and Americans — especially those with the resources and/or capacity to relocate as soon as a better opportunity beckons — are generally unwilling to make the compromises necessary to live in one.

Real community produces an ecosystem in which every member is deeply embedded, not a collection of relationships that can be picked up and moved if the owners desire it. A real community requires commitment to a certain social order, a certain set of institutions and norms, and usually to a certain place — and that commitment by definition must constrain some of our individual choices. But in return for surrendering some of our freedoms, we gain something far more valuable: practical support when in need, day-to-day camaraderie, and a greater sense of security and belonging. While this may breed a degree of insularity in some places, and has resulted in the exclusion of some in the past, it certainly does not have to be so. And in fact it is not so in many vibrant communities.

Much has been written about the myriad ways in which strong social relationships foster greater individual well-being. Less understood is that they are equally important to our national well-being. When citizens are disconnected from neighbors and unengaged in institutions, they lack the sense of security and belonging that community brings, often ending up anomic and alienated instead. They are more likely to seek zero-sum solutions in national politics in a way that polarizes debates, and in some cases even turn to authoritarian figures and ideologies to address their concerns. It is telling that in the 2016 primary elections, Donald Trump garnered the most votes in the counties and states with the lowest levels of social connectedness.

And just as individuals are not autonomous, relationships do not exist autonomously — they are embedded in social structures. For most of us, the structures that matter most are hyperlocal — the marriages, families, networks, schools, communities, and churches (and other places of worship) found in our local neighborhoods. When these social structures weaken, the talented and well-off can compensate and move on, but most of us are left more fragile by the strain.

For decades, we have sought to heal what ails these neighborhoods. Just not in the ways that work. We have tried spending trillions on the War on Poverty, the War on Drugs, and No Child Left Behind. We tried preaching “family values,” took aim at “welfare queens” in the 1980s and at fatherless households in the 1990s. We’ve held nationwide protests decrying the actions of greedy billionaires, racist cops, and family separation policies at our borders. We’ve passed laws “defending” marriage, regulating guns, and making health care affordable. And yet the symptoms of America’s social poverty are still flaring, after all these years; as a review of randomized social experiments in the US published in 2012 concluded, most widely touted ideas for improving schools, government, and other institutions either don’t work at all, or have a negligible impact.

I am not surprised: Most foreign aid dispensed by the US doesn’t help make the fragile states that receive it more stable. And preaching democracy to the Taliban doesn’t work.

Although frustration toward national leaders and policies may be our initial response to the difficulties of our era, such feelings are unlikely to yield real change. In contrast, when change is hyperlocal, that means we all have an opportunity to contribute — starting perhaps with our own neighborhoods, and working sideways, one ZIP code at a time. After all, who will care for these places, if not us? Others can’t do what we must.

Seth D. Kaplan, an expert on fragile states, is a professorial lecturer in the Paul H. Nitze School of Advanced International Studies (SAIS) at Johns Hopkins University; senior adviser for the Institute for Integrated Transitions (IFIT); and consultant to multilateral organizations such as the World Bank, US State Department, US Agency for International Development, and OECD as well as developing country governments and NGOs.

Reprinted with the permission of Little, Brown Spark. Copyright @2023.