To understand the effort needed to hedge your bets in today’s geo-economic environment, consider all the shoe leather spent lately by the trade minister of Peru, the world’s 38th-largest goods exporter.

Juan Carlos Mathews was in Spain three weeks ago, New York before that. This week it’s Japan, he said during the London stop last Thursday of a government roadshow aimed at promoting the South American country’s trade, investment and tourism.

“We are very active because we do believe that we have to grow through strategic alliances,” Mathews said. A more immediate concern: Peru is going through a recession and private investment is dwindling.

Peru is Britain’s 65th-largest trading partner, but like a lot of evolving trade relationships, the bilateral tally of exports and imports between two countries explains only part of the attraction these days. Peru got an estimated 250 RSVPs for its event in the auditorium of the JPMorgan building in Canary Wharf.

Read More: Meet the ‘Connector’ Economies Winning the Global Fragmentation Race

Less than a decade ago, Peru’s trade was about equally divided between Asia, Europe, North America and the rest of Latin America.

Now trade with Asia has reached 40% and China has vaulted past the US as Peru’s biggest trading partner, with most of it being minerals and fishmeal, Mathews said in an interview. So more trade with Europe offers Peru a chance to diversify.

Expand Source: Peru ministry of foreign trade and tourism

For the UK, the freedom to pursue more bilateral trade deals was one of the promises of Brexit, and Peru likes its free-trade deals — it has 22 of them and is pursuing four more, Mathews said.

Peru also has a lot of untapped mineral wealth and fresh food production to offer the world, and like nearly every other developed nation during the pandemic and the race to make electric vehicles, Britain got a taste of how vulnerable it feels when such supplies run short.

In London, Mathews met with mining companies Anglo American and Hochschild, as well as financiers from Goldman Sachs, Lloyds and RBC Capital Markets. That’s because Peru is seeking more joint venture partners from the US and Europe to go alongside growing participation from China.

One of Beijing’s biggest economic beachheads in Peru is currently under construction — a massive container port an hour’s drive north of Lima, in Chancay, built by China’s state-controlled shipping company.

Say “Chancay” fast and it sounds similar to China’s biggest maritime trade hub. “The slogan is ‘from Chancay to Shanghai,’” Mathews said.

Regional Trade Hub

The port, expected to partially open late next year, will operate on such a scale that it has the potential to handle goods flowing well beyond Peru, cutting shipping times from China to Chile, for instance, to 22 days from 32, Mathews said. “In the case of the Brazilians, it means 20 days less,” he said.

Read More: The Global Economy Enters an Era of Upheaval

While that’s likely to heat up regional trade rivalries, it’s the diplomatic balancing act between the world’s economic superpowers that’s as difficult for Peru and other countries to pull off.

“Chinese firms are willing and able to acquire and expand critical infrastructure in places where there may be few, if any, alternatives,” said Gerard DiPippo, senior geo-economics analyst with with Bloomberg Economics. “The US can warn of China’s influence over Chancay, but unless the US or its partners can make a better offer, it’ll have little effect.

In mid-October, Mathews said, the US government reached out questioning China’s role in an industry as strategically important as a deep-sea port capable of receiving the world’s biggest vessels and handling trade across South America.

“I said, we are absolutely open to investment — you were invited at the same time,” Mathews said of his response to Washington. “We are absolutely glad to receive investment from Europe, from Australia and from the USA — we have a lot of gaps and needs like new ports and airports. So please, come and participate.”

Related Reading on Bloomberg.com:

—Brendan Murray in London

Charted Territory

Staying With China | Almost 90% of businesses agree China’s digital economy offers new investment opportunities, according to a survey released Monday by HSBC that runs somewhat counter to the narrative that companies are growing more worried about operating in China. The polls showed 73% respondents expect to expand their supply-chain footprint in China during the next three years. Still, the share of respondents drawn by the ease of Chinese supply chains fell to 28% from 32% in 2022, HSBC said. “Our survey shows that international businesses are confident of their prospects in China and are continuing to invest in the country,” the survey concluded. “Despite macro-economic headwinds and trade tensions, China remains an essential part of global trade networks and offers an attractive, growing consumer market.”

Today’s Must Reads

China’s premier pledged that his nation would expand access to markets and also boost imports. Meanwhile, Prime Minister Anthony Albanese will be the first Australian leader to meet with President Xi Jinping in China in more than seven years, sealing a rapid recovery in their diplomatic relations.

Large corporations in the euro area are relocating production across the globe more actively as geopolitical risks rise, according to a survey by the European Central Bank.

Maersk said it’s cutting at least 10,000 jobs to shield its profitability in a shipping market that is set to remain weak until about 2026. According to Bloomberg Opinion’s Chris Bryant, Maersk leads an industry that must cut back to navigate its self-inflicted obstacles.

German factory orders unexpectedly rose again in September — offering further hope that the manufacturing woes gripping Europe’s biggest economy may be easing. Siemens will invest $510 million in new US manufacturing capacity, including an electrical-equipment plant in Texas.

Emirates is considering an order for Boeing or Airbus freighters and may convert more passenger jets to expand its cargo fleet.

The US aims to ensure that its preferential trade pact with Africa is replaced without interruption when it expires in two-year’s time, while bringing it up to date.

President Yoweri Museveni derided the US over its withdrawal of Uganda’s preferential trade access and said the East African nation can achieve its development targets without American support.

Watch this Bloomberg Original: China’s Belt and Road Initiative has plowed billions of dollars into infrastructure projects in Africa. That’s given Beijing prime access to the mining resources that will underpin the upcoming technology, energy and transport revolutions.

Coming Up

The sixth annual Bloomberg New Economy Forum returns to Singapore Nov. 8-10 as the world’s most influential leaders gather to address the critical issues facing the global economy. This year’s theme is “Embracing Instability.” Request an invitation here.

Join Bloomberg’s “Supply Chain Resiliency: Risk & Mitigation” event in Detroit on Nov. 16 for an afternoon with our research analysts & subject experts to discuss trends, risks, and innovative ways to monitor and manage critical supply-chain elements -- especially their impact on the auto industry. To register for the free, in-person-only event, click here.

On the Bloomberg Terminal

The Shanghai Containerized Freight Index rose 6% sequentially to 1,068 in the week through Nov. 3, the fourth consecutive gain Bloomberg Terminal . It’s now 79% below the January 2022 peak but 32% above the 2019 average, according to Bloomberg Intelligence.

. It’s now 79% below the January 2022 peak but 32% above the 2019 average, according to Bloomberg Intelligence. For Mexico, domestic demand has been surprisingly strong this year, and is poised to continue rising into 2024. Investment continues to benefit from the USMCA trade deal and global supply-chain reorganization Bloomberg Terminal , says Bloomberg Economics.

, says Bloomberg Economics. Run SPLC after an equity ticker on Bloomberg to show critical data about a company's suppliers, customers and peers.

Use the AHOY function to track global commodities trade flows.

For freight dashboards, see {BI RAIL}, {BI TRCK} and {BI SHIP} and {BI 3PLS}

Click HERE for automated stories about supply chains.

On the Bloomberg Terminal, type NH FWV for FreightWaves content.

See BNEF for BloombergNEF’s analysis of clean energy, advanced transport, digital industry, innovative materials, and commodities.

Like Supply Lines?

Don’t keep it to yourself. Colleagues and friends can sign up here. We also publish the New Economy Daily, a briefing on the latest in global economics.

For even more: Follow @economics on Twitter and subscribe to Bloomberg.com for unlimited access to trusted, data-driven journalism and gain expert analysis from exclusive subscriber-only newsletters.

How are we doing? We want to hear what you think about this newsletter. Let our trade tsar know.