Amy Taylor lives right near the border of the planned site for Atlanta’s Public Safety Training Center, and the "STOP COP CITY" sign in her lawn lets the frequently passing patrol cars know how she feels about it.

Many like Taylor who oppose the training center are pushing for a ballot referendum to overturn Atlanta’s 2021 decision to build what’s infamously come to be known as “Cop City.” They say the facility would cause environmental degradation to a historically significant forest, further militarize police operations and disturb nearby communities.

But if that referendum happens, Taylor and her neighbors won’t be allowed to vote on it. That’s because they’re not residents of Atlanta, which owns the site, and live in an unincorporated section of bordering DeKalb County, meaning they’re not part of any city. The most that residents of these unincorporated parts have been able to do is gather signatures for a petition to authorize the referendum.

It’s one battle within a broader war over the future of the proposed development. Atlanta city leaders say a modernized first-responder training hub is needed to replace the city’s aging training facilities, while a conglomerate of “Cop City” dissenters both in and out of state have displayed opposition to the plan since it was first proposed, mostly through constant direct action protests and occupation of the planned site.

This year, several dozen activists were labeled as “domestic terrorists” by local police, while others recently faced racketeering charges by the state. In January, police shot and killed environmental activist Manuel “Tortuguita” Terán who was camping in the forest during an enforcement sweep.

“I have been living in a police state for the last year and a half,” says Taylor, as police sedans circle her neighborhood, ensuring that no one accesses the training center site. “This community has been abused for so long that they feel that there is nothing they can do.”

Expand Activists Amy Taylor and Shar Bates discuss the Atlanta Public Safety Training Center, also known as “Cop City,” at Taylor’s house. Photographer: Brentin Mock/Bloomberg News

Her hope was renewed this summer, when activists successfully sued for the right of DeKalb County residents to help gather signatures for a ballot referendum petition. On Sept. 11, members of a coalition of organizations that oppose the training center delivered the petition to Atlanta’s city clerk office with more than 116,000 signatures, well over the 58,231-signature threshold. The city, however, has refused to begin the process of verifying signatures and addresses, saying it is waiting for a federal court ruling on whether organizers missed a critical deadline.

If a measure does make it to the ballot — likely for next March — only Atlanta city residents who were registered to vote as of the 2021 municipal election will be allowed to participate based on current rules. Such criteria have raised questions about the voting rights and political power of people who live in unincorporated jurisdictions, particularly in this case, where they would be the most directly impacted by the construction and presence of the public safety training facilities. Even before the “Cop City” proposal, some people in this area had been advocating unsuccessfully to form their own city, which might have given them more leverage in situations like this one.

When Taylor bought her house in early 2020, it was because the city was planning on turning the area, known as South River Forest (also Weelaunee People’s Park and Intrenchment Creek Park), into a protected green space to conserve the tree canopy and water bodies there. These plans were adopted into Atlanta’s city charter in 2017. Taylor believes that’s one reason the city council shouldn't have voted in 2021 to use some of the forest for the training facility.

For Taylor, the closest she could get to having a voice in the matter was to join the training center’s Community Stakeholder Advisory Committee, created in 2021 to weigh in on how the complex will be built – but not whether it will be built. And while the city has accepted the group’s recommendations for trails, sidewalks, a tree buffer, and community space that’s a safe distance from police and fire operations, the agreement isn’t legally binding.

“There are no guarantees,” says Taylor. “I have asked over and over again, where is the accountability on this? What’s going to happen five years down the road and y’all haven’t done anything that you promised us? What recourse do we have? Nothing.”

Expand Construction crews work at the planned site of the police training facility on Feb. 6, 2023. Photographer: CHENEY ORR/AFP

Target Practice Outside the Window

The city of Atlanta is not waiting for a ballot referendum outcome. It has already begun razing trees and clearing debris from the forest for the first construction phase of the training center. While the land for the site is in unincorporated DeKalb County, the city owns the parcels slated for the complex.

Atlanta Mayor Andre Dickens has said he supports the training center as a “classroom space that redefines how we approach policing” by incorporating 21st-century recommendations such as racial sensitivity training and de-escalation techniques.

The estimated budget for the project is $90 million, a third of which will be covered by the Atlanta Police Foundation, a nonprofit philanthropy that serves as the training center’s primary custodian. The rest will be picked up by Atlanta taxpayers.

The training complex plans to cover 85 acres of the forest with various stations including, according to its website: a driving training course; canine training grounds and kennels; a “mock city” consisting of a model house, nightclub, gas station and motel “to simulate real-world training”; and a firing range with “sound baffling and barriers.”

Expand A rendering of the planned police training facility. Courtesy of Atlanta Police Foundation

The Atlanta police department already uses parts of the forest for gun target practice. While the site of the training complex is not currently accessible to the public, people who used to walk the trails would commonly find abandoned vehicles, mattresses and stone slabs riddled with bullet holes. Besides the neighborhood where Taylor lives, there are several other subdivisions and apartment complexes surrounding the training center site, along with a high school, a few daycare centers, and some churches.

One of the communities close to the training center site is the Boulder Walk subdivision, where spacious homes feature well-manicured front and back yards. Here, there is plenty of support for the public safety training center, according to Alison Clark, the chair of the Community Stakeholder Advisory Committee that Taylor also serves on. Clark is also a co-chair of The Great Park Connection Conservancy and the former president of Boulder Walk’s homeowners’ association. In these roles, Clark has advocated for greater public use of her neighboring forests and parks, better protection of the environment, and the development of the emergency training hub.

“Having that property in use, I think, is an enhancement for our community safety,” says Clark. “Now, instead of just having community members using those trails, you’ll actually have them encountering public safety individuals using those same trails. And those two pieces connect with one another: public safety and community.”

Clark says there are many people who support the training center but are afraid to speak up “due to the behavior of the trespassers occupying land within our community and mounting violent attacks on people associated with the project.”

But Reverend Keyanna Jones, an organizer for Community Movement Builders and the Vote to Stop Cop City Coalition, says most of the people she met while gathering referendum signatures had no knowledge that the training center was being planned in their backyards until she came into contact with them.

Though she previously lived near the forest site, she recently ended up moving away because the sounds from the police gun range were disturbing her son, whom she homeschools.

“It became very problematic because my son could not concentrate,” said Jones. “He was constantly afraid and every time he heard a loud noise he would fall to the ground or cower behind me, or just try to take cover somewhere. At night it sounded like it was right outside of his bedroom window.”

Expand A memorial to activist Manuel “Tortuguita” Terán, who was killed by police in January during a raid of South River Forest, where he had been camping. Photographer: Brentin Mock/Bloomberg News

‘This Is Not An Election’

Jones is one of four residents of unincorporated DeKalb County who sued to allow people living in the jurisdiction to gather ballot initiative petition signatures. Now that the 116,000-plus signatures have been submitted to the city, they sit in limbo. The city is arguing that the petitioners missed an Aug. 21 deadline and is waiting for a ruling from the federal 11th Circuit Court of Appeals to determine whether or when the city should start the signature validation process.

Meanwhile, the petitioners say they were acting on a June 27 court ruling — the one that allowed non-Atlanta residents to collect signatures — which they interpreted as saying they had an extension of the deadline.

Even if the judge orders the city to begin the verification process, there is low confidence among anti-“Cop City” activists and civil rights advocates that the city’s verification process would be fair. Advocates allege that the city’s announced methods of cross-matching petition signatures with state voter registration card signatures is a ploy that Georgia Republicans have used and been sued for as part of the party’s efforts to suppress and disqualify Democratic votes.

The city responded in August that its process is different than the one Georgia Republicans have used to purge voters from registration rolls. The city clerk’s office did not respond to Bloomberg CityLab’s requests for comment and further clarification.

Meanwhile, many of Atlanta’s public leaders — including US Senator Raphael Warnock; former Georgia gubernatorial candidate Stacey Abrams; and Bernice A. King, daughter of Martin Luther King Jr. and CEO of The King Center — have gone on record saying that the city needs to begin the signature verification process to get a measure on the ballot. Some have accused the city of voter suppression. On Sept. 19, Atlanta’s city council unanimously passed a resolution urging the city to begin scanning the petition signature documents.

In an 11-page letter to Warnock, Atlanta Mayor Dickens said that while he would strive to treat those seeking a referendum with fairness and respect, the city isn’t suppressing votes because “this is not an election.”

“Standing in front of your local grocery store to collect signatures from customers who may be residents, while commendable, is vastly different from registering to vote and casting a ballot,” wrote Dickens. “Equating the petition process to voter suppression minimizes actual instances of voter suppression.”

Mailing Address, but No Vote

The controversy is also resurfacing longstanding confusion among residents about where they call home and what rights they have. Because the US Postal Service assigns the closest city to residents of unincorporated counties, many people in unincorporated parts of DeKalb County have “Atlanta” in their mailing address. A memo from the Atlanta city clerk’s office released in August spells out that people who do not live in the city are not eligible to sign a petition “despite having a City of Atlanta mailing address.”

Jones said the lawsuit that allowed DeKalb residents who can’t sign the petition to at least gather signatures “was our way of giving a voice to those people who live closest to and are the most directly affected by the building of Cop City — the same people who have no vote.”

“If we get this referendum on the ballot — and I will say when we get this referendum on the ballot, those people who live there still will not be able to vote even though they're trying to build up Cop City in their backyards,” Jones added.

Even Clark, despite her support for the training complex, wishes her neighborhood had more say in the project. She does not support the ballot referendum effort as it stands, principally because it wouldn’t allow her and her neighbors to vote on it.

“It’s disappointing because we are the people most impacted by this project, and we should be the people whose voices are elevated in this process,” says Clark. “I do think that the voices that should be heard and considered relative to this project should be the residents of unincorporated DeKalb, the residents living nearest to the project.”

‘We Were Never Asked’

Like many of his neighbors, Brian “Scapegoat Jones” Page, once mistakenly believed that he lived in the city of Atlanta due to his mailing address. Page owns a home in a subdivision near the training center site, not far from another nearby home that he grew up in. Since he was a child, he has trekked the South Forest River trails near where he used to play football with his friends in the open grass. Today, he sends his children to Barack H. Obama Magnet Elementary School of Technology, not far from the site.

Expand Brian “Scapegoat Jones” Page stands outside a blockaded section of South River Forest that used to be open to the public. Photographer: Brentin Mock/Bloomberg

He was surprised to hear that the gunshots he’d grown accustomed to hearing from the forest came not from gangs, as he was told, but from police target practicing. One day last year, while walking a trail in the woods, he started seeing “Stop Cop City” signs on trees. Not long after, he said, police approached him on the trail and upbraided him for doing the same hike he’d been doing since a kid.

“I was just trying to get my steps in,” said Page. “I didn’t even know all of this Cop City stuff was going on.”

Page believes the reason his neighborhood was targeted for this project is because, as an unincorporated community, there is no local city council or mayor to contend with. The one elected official representing these parts is DeKalb County Commissioner Ted Terry, who says he found out about the training center while watching the news in 2021. He opposes the training center, but is outflanked by almost every other city, county, and state official orbiting his district.

“They just literally held a press conference and said, ‘Look at this great idea we came up with,’ but we were never asked or invited to a meeting about this,” says Terry. “This is why there is so much distrust in government right now, especially when it comes to land use decisions and environmental impacts.”

The communities bordering the training center site are predominantly Black, working-class neighborhoods that Terry says the city of Atlanta has neglected and saddled with environmental racism for decades.

“There’s no political downside to Atlanta’s political leaders approving a project in another jurisdiction because they don’t have to answer to those voters,” says Terry. “So for them, it was a win-win. They got their training center and it’s not anywhere near any of their constituents. And the detrimental impacts are impacting another jurisdiction.”

Among those potential effects are land and noise disturbances and pollution runoff into the forest’s watersheds, creeks and rivers. Some of these issues have already drawn lawsuits aimed at stopping the training center from happening.

According to a survey of DeKalb voters conducted by the market research firm HIT Strategies in June, 39% opposed the training center, 35% supported it and 26% were neutral. Of that neutral portion, 40% had heard “very little or nothing” about the complex. After hearing more information about it from the survey takers, the percentage of DeKalb voters who opposed it rose to 51%.

As his old stomping grounds are cleared out and fenced off, Page wonders why “Cop City” isn’t being built in a place like Buckhead, the wealthy section of Atlanta where some sought to secede to form their own city, citing crime and policing problems. “I thought the crime was out of control out there? I thought it was a war zone?” said Page, referencing how Buckhead organizers spoke during their cityhood campaign. “If they want police so bad, why don’t they build it out there?”