June 24, 2023

Justices of the US Supreme Court Photographer: Eric Lee/Bloomberg

For an institution that prides itself on tradition and being a source of stability, the US Supreme Court is presiding over a historic and divisive realignment of the national levers of power.

The 6-3 conservative majority has issued a series of recent opinions enhancing the court’s own role, in many cases by overriding regulatory agencies, the White House, Congress and state and local governments.

Rulings have curtailed environmental protections, restricted efforts to regulate firearms and limited public-health initiatives. And some of the court’s key decisions — like overturning the right to abortion and restricting the federal government’s power to curb greenhouse gases — are in direct contrast with the views of the majority of Americans.

This week, ProPublica reported that Justice Samuel Alito accepted travel to Alaska on a private jet in 2008 from hedge fund chief Paul Singer, who years later had business before the court. That followed revelations that Justice Clarence Thomas took luxury vacations and gifts funded by Republican megadonor Harlan Crow, who also had business in front of the court. The disclosures underscored how little control the public has over nine justices who don’t have a code of conduct but do have life tenure under the Constitution.

The Supreme Court has never been viewed with as much mistrust by the American public. And after the 2021 attack on the US Capitol, the state of American democracy is under a microscope on the global stage. Major decisions are expected on affirmative action, student loan repayments and federal election rules by the end of the term next week.

The BlueOval SK electric vehicle battery manufacturing facility under construction in Tennessee. Photographer: Houston Cofield/Bloomberg

President Joe Biden is spending billions to push an aggressive industrial policy to the forefront of the American economy — reshoring manufacturing and catching the US up with China on green tech. This week, Ford got a $9.2 billion loan to build three EV battery factories in Tennessee and Kentucky. The enormous loan — by far the biggest government backing for a US automaker since the bailouts in the financial crisis — marks a watershed moment for Biden’s push. Hear from the head of the office doling out the loans to fund futuristic energy projects on Zero podcast from Bloomberg Green.

For all their savvy dealmaking, even the titans of private equity were caught unprepared for the swift rise in interest rates. Many buyout firms considered hedging against rising rates to be a waste of time and money. Their debt-laden companies are now paying the price.

This week on The Big Take podcast: inside Canada’s immigration policy, Americans are still obsessed with chicken, and Microsoft’s AI dominance. Subscribe and listen on iHeart, Apple and Spotify.

ㅤ

“They’re not taking stuff away. They’re adding, and in adding then our economy grows for everybody, which means more work, more jobs, more money.” Kevin McNichol CEO of Prospect Human Services, which helps Albertans and newcomers get jobs. Canada made immigration a central part of its economic policy, which is bolstering its businesses, while creating strains in big cities.

ㅤ

$1.4 trillion The amount of commercial real estate loans coming due this year and next in the US

What Else We're Reading