This is Washington Edition, the newsletter about money, power and politics in the nation’s capital. Today, congressional correspondent Erik Wasson outlines where things stand on averting a government shutdown. Sign up here and follow us at @bpolitics. Email our editors here.

Making a Deal

The chances of an economically damaging partial government shutdown this weekend are declining and optimism is rising in Washington.

The newfound hope emerged from an Oval Office meeting between President Joe Biden and House Speaker Mike Johnson.

Biden and the other three congressional leaders went into the meeting publicly committed to avoiding a standoff over government funding. Johnson, though, was under pressure from Republican hardliners to use a shutdown as a bargaining chip to get concessions on border and immigration policy out of Biden.

After a one-on-one with the president, Johnson walked out of the White House saying he was “very optimistic” about sealing a deal on spending.

Expand Johnson Photographer: Evan Vucci/AP

The can-do attitude only went so far. Johnson made clear he is prepared to continue to hold up aid to Ukraine over the border.

The emerging plan would provide full-year funding for the departments facing a Friday deadline, including Veterans Affairs, Agriculture, Energy, Transportation and Housing and Urban Development. Departments facing a March 8 deadline would get a temporary funding patch through March 22.

There are a few relatively small policy disputes that still need to be worked out.

But time is short. If the House and Senate can’t finish the combination bill by the end of the day Friday, lawmakers will need to pass a stopgap of several days to avoid a weekend shutdown.

Even as the shutdown risk fades for now, the problems for Ukraine aid only deepened. Johnson in his meeting with the president continued to insist on immigration policy changes that the White House has said it can’t legally make.

Senate Majority Leader Chuck Schumer said he’s willing to negotiate a new border bill with Johnson but that it will take a while, putting Ukraine in deeper peril as it fights off Russia.

Don’t Miss

Turmoil in the Middle East poses a risk to Biden’s reelection bid, threatening to sap turnout among some of his key supporters in swing states such as Michigan that risks flipping the race to Donald Trump.

Trump dubbed himself the “King of Debt” when boasting about how his business empire survived hard times, but a pair of big trial court losses this year are putting that to the test.

Trump asked a judge to block prosecutors from arguing at his upcoming hush money criminal trial that he tried to influence the 2016 election by paying to silence a porn star who claimed to have had an affair with him.

New York Democratic legislators proposed new congressional district lines today that could boost their party’s prospects for regaining control of the US House.

Federal Reserve Governor Michelle Bowman said again that she expects inflation will continue to decline further with interest rates held at their current level, but said it’s too soon to begin rate cuts.

Expand Bowman Photographer: Kent Nishimura/Bloomberg

Treasury Secretary Janet Yellen said the world’s largest advanced economies should find a way to “unlock the value” of frozen Russian assets to help bolster Ukraine.

Orders placed with US factories for business equipment barely rose in January after falling the prior month, suggesting firms are restraining their investment amid an uncertain outlook.

Sensitive personal data related to health, location or web browsing history should be “off limits” for training artificial intelligence models, US Federal Trade Commission Chair Lina Khan said.

Watch & Listen

Today on Bloomberg Television's Balance of Power early edition at 1 p.m., hosts Joe Mathieu and Kailey Leinz interviewed Rohit Kumar, head of Tax Policy Services at PwC and a former top Senate aide, about the chances of a spending deal to avert a partial government shutdown.

On the program at 5 p.m., they talk with Democratic Senator Elizabeth Warren about antitrust cases, crypto and aid for Ukraine.

On the Odd Lots podcast, Bloomberg's Tracy Alloway and Joe Weisenthal talk with Krishna Kumar, a portfolio manager at Goose Hollow Capital Management, about the rise of multi-strategy hedge funds and how that’s changing the way that markets trade. Listen on iHeart, Apple Podcasts and Spotify.

Map of the Day

Florida home prices rose by more than 83% between the fourth quarter of 2018 and the fourth quarter of 2023, according to the Federal Housing Finance Agency House Price Index. That's the most of any state and tops second place Idaho and third place Arizona, which grew by 81.3 and 78.7% respectively over the last 5 years. At the low end, homes prices in Louisiana are up 30.7%. By city, the Tampa metro is the winner with area homes prices up almost 90%, and 10 of the top 15 highest gainers were Florida cities. Home prices growth in San Francisco was the weakest with at 10.1% rise. In the nation's capital prices are up just 14.8%. — Alex Tanzi

What’s Next

The second estimate of fourth-quarter US gross domestic product is out at 8:30 a.m. tomorrow.

The personal consumption expenditures price index and data on personal income and spending is set for release at 8:30 a.m. Thursday.

The deadline for Congress to pass four of 12 annual funding bills or agree on a stopgap to avert a partial government shutdown is Friday.

US factory orders for January will be reported at 10 a.m. Tuesday

The Super Tuesday round of 15 state primaries is next Tuesday.

Biden is scheduled to deliver his State of the Union address March 7.

Seen Elsewhere

The US Army is cutting the size of its force by almost 5%, about 24,000 soldiers, as it restructures in response to changing threats and struggles with recruiting shortfalls, the Associated Press reports.

Security for former Trump national security advisers John Bolton and Robert O’Brien, provided after they left office due to potential threats from Iran, cost more than $12 million for one year, CBS News reports.



More From Bloomberg

And sign up for more Bloomberg newsletters at Bloomberg.com.