Americans are walking way less than they were before the pandemic, according to a new StreetLight Data report: Between 2019 and 2022, walking trips plummeted by 36%, with at least a 20% drop in every state and in all of the top 100 most populated metro areas. The “universal” decline comes as pedestrian deaths climbed to a 40-year high.

Meanwhile cycling has soared, including on bikeshare systems. A separate report from the National Association of City Transportation Officials highlighted the steady recovery of the shared micromobility market from Covid: Americans made 113 million trips on shared bikes and electric scooters in 2022, up a million from the year before and double the number of rides during the first year of the pandemic. Read more from me today on CityLab: As Cycling Booms, Waking Trips Crashed During Covid

— Linda Poon

More on CityLab

Silicon Valley City Wants to Ease Housing Crisis With $150,000 Cargo Containers

San Jose is betting on ‘quick-build’ dwellings as a salve for homelessness. Critics say a longer-term plan is needed.

Artifacts of a Lost St. Louis

The new exhibit ‘Urban Archaeology’ shows off architectural relics salvaged from buildings destroyed during the city’s urban renewal era.

Online Gambling Has Millions of Young Africans Battling Addiction

A generation faces growing dependency on the false hopes of betting.

What we’re reading

Shasta County ditched its Dominion voting machines. Now, residents are braced for turmoil on Nov. 7 (Los Angeles Times)

A billion-dollar bet on local news (The Atlantic)

When facing eviction, some D.C. renters will now get free lawyers (Washington Post)

Autoworkers’ historic victory is a turning point in the climate culture war (The New Republic)

Japan faces ‘inevitable’ rise in bear attacks as climate change pushes them into urban areas (South China Morning Post)

More from Bloomberg

Economics Daily for what the changing landscape means for policy makers, investors and you

Green Daily for the latest in climate news, zero-emission tech and green finance

Hyperdrive for expert insight into the future of cars

Paris Edition for making sense of what's happening in the city and what's next for French business

Work Shift for exclusive insight and data on the future of work

Explore all Bloomberg newsletters at Bloomberg.com.