Welcome to the Bloomberg Surveillance newsletter, a daily look at the best interviews and insights from Bloomberg Television and Radio’s flagship morning show co-hosted by Tom Keene, Jonathan Ferro and Lisa Abramowicz. Sign up here if you’re not yet a newsletter subscriber.

2024? That’s a different story

US inflation is slowing. The Fed is nearing the end of its rate-hiking cycle. Markets’ election-year history is positive. There’s a solid case for a second leg to the bull market in stocks — but with an asterisk.

It’s called September.

Surveillance guests mused on a caution theme today at the start of a data-filled week that confounds stereotypes of a sleepy, last-days-at-the-beach coda to Wall Street’s summer. CFRA’s Sam Stovall laid out his optimism-later, concern-now scenario after putting out a note titled “September’s Slippery Slope.”

The “slippery aspect,” he said, is uncertainty over next month’s Fed meeting and the risk of regression in the improvement in core PCE data in the reading due on Wednesday.

“That’s going to give additional reason why September is the only month to decline more frequently than advance,” Stovall said. But he’s feeling more constructive looking into 2024. Since World War II, he said, first-term presidents have benefited from stock-market rallies in election years.

“That’s not a guarantee,” he acknowledged. “But it’s certainly a comforting statistic to say there’s a good possibility that the market will be higher next year as well.”

A US payrolls report on Friday comes on the heels of Wednesday’s PCE release. The usual labor-market numbers are out, too, with reports on job openings, ADP employment change and weekly claims. Data-dependent markets also will chew on a US CPI print on Sept. 13, the European Central Bank’s rate decision on Sept. 14 and the Fed’s next meeting on Sept. 19-20.

Phil Orlando at Federated Global Investment Management is urging a moment to let things settle, echoing the caution of Stovall and of Evercore ISI’s Julian Emanuel, whose research note yesterday noodled on the question of whether stocks’ recent retrenchment was more than a “seasonal setback.” Orlando noted that the S&P 500 was down for the quarter — 1% through Friday — after roaring to a 16% first-half gain.

“We felt there would be sort of a reversion of the mean during this third quarter period — 10% to 12% is a reasonable place to start and let’s see what the valuation looks like when we get there,” Orlando said on Surveillance. “If you’ve got a three-year time horizon, we’re extraordinarily bullish. Our near-term call is somewhat tactical and somewhat defensive.”

He added: “The one area that we’ve got sort of a negative bias on is these growth, tech names that we think got ahead of themselves.”

At Northern Trust Wealth Management, Katie Nixon said the outlook for bond investors is solid. In stocks? “There’s sort of many dimensions to the headwinds for US equities,” she said, citing higher valuations, the risk of margin pressure as companies lose some pricing power and China’s drag on global growth.

Many Northern Trust clients are business owners, she said, and “because of their front-row seat in the economy I think there’s a natural caution right now.”

“They can get higher returns in cash, short- and even longer-term duration right now,” Nixon said. “So we’re seeing a rebalancing of portfolios away from risk and more toward locking in goals, funding of goals with these high short-term interest rates.”

China, the US and what’s next

China continues to sputter in its efforts to revive flagging confidence and a slowing economy. At the same time, US Commerce Secretary Gina Raimondo — a key figure in the export controls that rile China’s leaders — is on the scene this week.

“This is the most important visit we have had so far from a member of the administration,” said Eurasia Group’s Anna Ashton. “She’s really pushed for a more robust and more stable commercial relationship, and she’s gotten some receptivity from her counterparts.”

Ashton said it was significant that the Biden administration is still trying to soothe economic tensions heading into a 2024 election season in which detente is decidedly out of fashion. The US has made clear it won’t retreat on its national security priorities, Ashton said, but there is still a vast swath of trade untouched by those concerns.

“I find it very interesting to see the Biden administration deciding that stability is the course it wants to chart,” Ashton said.

China itself is finding it difficult to boost market sentiment. Its latest effort to reassure stock investors fizzled out. Meanwhile, Bloomberg’s reporting showed how Apple Inc.’s iPhone supply chain is splintering amid Washington-Beijing tensions.

A sour US mood

The state of the union may be strong. As to the mood of the nation? “Not good, on several fronts. Not good.”

Gallup’s Mohamed Younis offered that assessment today as the 2024 presidential race quickens and economic data keep suggesting that the US may achieve a soft landing. Forget any credit accruing to President Joe Biden, or pretty much anyone in authority.

If Republicans are cheered by a sour national mood and Biden’s dismal standing, there is still little public enthusiasm for their field. Neither frontrunner Donald Trump nor any of his rivals is faring any better, Younis noted.

“Again, we’re going to see an election where Americans for the most part are choosing between options they are not thrilled about unless somebody new and miraculous jumps into the ring, and that doesn’t look like that’s going to happen right now,” Younis said.

The pox-on-all-their-houses sentiment creates a new dynamic for pollsters. Under the old political math, Younis said, an incumbent needed a 50% approval rating for a reasonable shot at re-election.

“The big debate in the polling world these days is, is that a dynamic of the past and are we moving into a different era?” Younis said. “Right now neither Biden nor Trump are even close to 50.”

On the set

Bloomberg’s Kailey Leinz joined Jon and Tom in co-anchoring the show today. Lisa is off this week. Some notes from the studio today:

More from Surveillance

Bloomberg Surveillance is live weekdays from 6 to 9 a.m. New York time. Watch on Bloomberg Television, on the Terminal at TV<GO> and on YouTube; or listen to the show on Bloomberg Radio and RADI<GO> from 7 to 10 a.m. You can watch full episodes and subscribe to the Bloomberg Surveillance podcast. Check out GTV<GO> for all the charts seen on Bloomberg Television.

Get Bloomberg newsletters in your inbox

Supply Lines for daily insights into supply chains and globe trade

Energy Daily for a daily guide to the energy and commodities markets that power the global economy

Bw Daily for unique perspectives, original reporting and insightful analysis from Businessweek’s renowned journalists, every weekday

Crypto for an essential read on the crypto universe, delivered straight to your inbox twice a week

Sign up for more newsletters at Bloomberg.com.