Sign up to receive the Balance of Power newsletter in your inbox, and follow Bloomberg Politics on Twitter and Facebook for more.

The struggle between Arabs and Jews over ownership of the Holy Land dates back more than a century and has given rise to seven major wars. The latest broke out on Oct. 7 when the Islamist Palestinian group Hamas, which is dedicated to Israel’s destruction and which the US and European Union have designated a terrorist organization, attacked southern Israel from the Gaza Strip, killing 1,200 people in towns, kibbutzim, army bases and a music festival in the desert. More than 34,000 people have died in Israel’s military response, according to the Hamas-run health ministry in Gaza. Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu said at least 13,000 of the dead as of early March were militants. Here’s your guide to understanding the conflict between the US-backed Israel and the Iran-backed Hamas.

1. What are the roots of the conflict?

Nationalism grew among both Arabs and Jews in the Holy Land — which encompasses what today is Israel, the West Bank and Gaza — after the World War I-era collapse of the Ottoman Empire, which had ruled the territory for centuries. In 1920, the war’s victors gave the UK a mandate to administer what was then called Palestine. Intercommunal fighting in the territory was exacerbated by resistance among Arabs to Jewish immigration, which rose in the 1930s; in the face of Nazi persecution, increasing numbers of Jews from abroad sought sanctuary in their ancient homeland, where Jews have lived for nearly 4,000 years. In an effort to stop Arab-Jewish violence, a British commission in 1937 proposed partitioning the territory to create a state for each group. A decade later, the United Nations endorsed a different division.

2. What came of efforts to divide the land in two?

The Jews said yes both times, but the Arabs said no. After declaring its independence in 1948, Israel was attacked by neighboring Arab states, and its wartime gains established the borders of the new nation. The Palestinians use the term Nakba, or disaster, to refer to this period, which produced an estimated 700,000 Palestinian refugees.

3. Who are the Palestinians?

In a 1967 war, Israel captured, among other territories, the Gaza Strip from Egyptian control and the West Bank from Jordanian control. It put the Arab Palestinians who populated those two areas, widely known by this time simply as Palestinians, under military occupation, further fueling nationalism and resentment among them. A large majority of Palestinians are Sunni Muslims. A minority are Christians.

4. What is Hamas?

The Arabic acronym for the Islamic Resistance Movement, Hamas was founded in 1987 during the first Palestinian intifada, or uprising, against Israeli occupation. It was a spinoff of Egypt’s Muslim Brotherhood, an Islamist religious, social and political movement. It initially gained popularity among Palestinians by establishing a network of charities that address poverty as well as health-care and educational needs. It later gained notoriety for a campaign of suicide bombings and other attacks on Israelis.

A poll conducted in the Gaza Strip and West Bank in early March suggested the war had increased the popular standing of Hamas. If given a choice in legislative elections, 47% of Palestinians who said they’d vote said they’d choose Hamas. That compared with 22% for Fatah, the main faction of the secular Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO), the former guerrilla group that made peace with Israel in 1993. In a poll in September, before the war erupted, support for Hamas stood at 34% and for Fatah at 36%. In the March poll, 71% of respondents said Hamas’s decision to launch its Oct. 7 attack on Israel was correct.

Read more: What Is Hamas, the Militant Group at War With Israel?: QuickTake

5. What does Hamas want?

The main goal of Hamas, as articulated in a revised charter issued in 2017, is the destruction of the state of Israel. The document describes all of the Holy Land as “an Arab Islamic land” and says Hamas rejects any option but its “complete liberation.” According to the revised charter, the group’s conflict is with “the Zionist project,” not with Jews, per se. The original charter of Hamas said, “The day of judgment will not come about until Muslims fight the Jews and kill them.” The newer document says “resisting the occupation with all means and methods is a legitimate right guaranteed by divine laws.”

6. What’s a Zionist?

The Zionism movement, originating in late 19th century Europe in response to antisemitism, supported the establishment of a homeland for the Jewish people in their ancient homeland. It was named for a hill in Jerusalem mentioned in the Old Testament. Since the movement has achieved its aim, today a Zionist is someone who supports the development and protection of the state of Israel.

7. What’s the Gaza Strip?

The Gaza Strip is a small enclave — bounded by Israel, Egypt and the Mediterranean Sea — where 2.2 million Palestinians, most of them classified as refugees, lived in crowded and impoverished conditions even before the current war. For about a decade, Gaza was governed by the Palestinian Authority, the body responsible for limited Palestinian self-rule under the Oslo peace accords signed by Israel and the PLO. In 2005, Israel withdrew troops from Gaza and abandoned settlements of Israeli citizens there. In Palestinian legislative elections the next year, Hamas defeated Fatah, which dominates the Palestinian Authority. After months of fighting between the two groups, Hamas took control of Gaza in 2007. Since then, Hamas has used Gaza to periodically launch rocket attacks and raids on Israel, and Israel and Egypt have enforced tight restrictions on the movement of people and goods in and out of the strip. Israel has long maintained control of Gaza’s airspace and maritime territory.

Read more: Why Gaza Is Epicenter of Israeli-Palestinian Conflict: QuickTake

8. Why are there so many refugees in Gaza?

Many of the Arab refugees from the 1948 war and its aftermath fled to Gaza. Their descendants are counted as refugees today because no permanent solution for them has been found. Palestinians argue that in addition to thousands of the original refugees who are still alive, some 5 million of their descendants — in Gaza, the West Bank and abroad — are entitled to the “right of return” to Israel. Israeli officials disagree. They worry that with such an influx, combined with the nearly 2 million Arabs who are already citizens of Israel, the country’s 6.7 million Jews could become outnumbered, defeating the purpose of creating a Jewish state.

Read more: Why Palestinians Demand a ‘Right of Return’ to Israel: QuickTake

9. What’s the status of the West Bank?

The West Bank is a landlocked block of territory west of the Jordan River where 3.2 million Palestinians live. It’s also home to about a half-million Jewish Israelis living in so-called settlements established after the occupation began. And unlike in Gaza, Israeli security forces still have a fixed presence in the West Bank. Some Israelis argue that because the West Bank — which they refer to by its biblical name, Judea and Samaria — was part of the historic homeland of the Jews, Israel should annex it. The Palestinian Authority exercises limited autonomy in the West Bank, and Israel has overall control there, as laid out in the Oslo accords. The agreements were meant to establish interim arrangements while the two sides negotiated a final-status agreement. That was widely presumed to mean a so-called two-state solution, entailing the creation of a Palestinian state alongside Israel.

Read more: Israel Annex the West Bank? How a Taboo Idea Got Real: QuickTake

10. What happened with the peace talks?

In the years after the first agreements were signed, trust between the two sides eroded. Hamas launched suicide bombings and other attacks in Israel, and Israelis continued to expand settlements. Negotiators repeatedly failed to resolve issues standing in the way of a final-status agreement, including where to draw borders, how to share Jerusalem, and the status of Palestinian refugees. A second intifada, from 2000 to 2005, was bloodier than the first. The last round of talks broke down in 2014.

Read more: How Israel, Palestinians Went From Peacemaking to War: QuickTake

11. What are prospects for reviving the two-state solution?

US President Joe Biden was among the global leaders who voiced support for this idea even as the latest war was starting. But since the last big push for it, under US President Barack Obama, the positions of both sides have hardened. Opposition to the two-state solution among Palestinians stood at 52% in the March survey. In a mid-February poll, 55% of Israelis said they opposed the creation of an independent Palestinian state even if it was demilitarized. In a joint survey of both sides conducted in December 2022, 37% of Israeli Jews said they’d like to see a single non-democratic state in which Palestinians did not have equal rights. Thirty percent of Palestinians said they wanted a single, Palestinian-dominated state.

Read more: What Israeli, Palestinian ‘Two-State Solution’ Means: QuickTake

12. What’s a kibbutz?

Several of the towns Hamas fighters struck Oct. 7 were Israeli communities called kibbutzim, the Hebrew plural for kibbutz, which means gathering. A phenomenon unique to Israel, a kibbutz is a collective community, typically engaged in farming. The first was established in 1910, and today there are about 250 of them. The early kibbutzim were radical experiments in egalitarianism, with residents pooling all income and sharing it equitably, eating all their meals together, and sometimes raising their children in group houses. Today, many of the kibbutzim have departed from those practices, but they still preserve elements of communal living.

13. What explains the timing of the Oct. 7 Hamas attack?

Hamas didn’t cite a particular reason, but the timing of the assault, unprecedented in its scale, was notable for a couple of reasons. First, it happened at a time of protracted Israeli infighting over a plan by Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu’s government to weaken the judiciary. Retired generals had warned that Israel’s enemies might seek to exploit the disunity. Second, it came amid a diplomatic effort to seal a grand bargain in which Saudi Arabia, the richest and most powerful Arab state, would normalize relations with Israel in return for US security guarantees. Saudi Arabia wants an agreement with the US that would be as close as possible to a mutual defense pact — in which Washington would regard any attack on the kingdom as an attack on the US — to ease its concerns about Iran, which it blames for devastating strikes on Saudi oil facilities in 2019. Such a deal would further isolate Iran, Hamas’ patron, and expand the circle of Arab and Muslim countries friendly to Israel, Hamas’ enemy.

14. Why does the US support Israel?

After the Hamas attacks, to show support for its ally the US moved additional warships, aircraft and troops into the region and expedited shipments of munitions to Israel. Since World War II, Israel has received more US aid than any other country — some $158 billion in assistance and missile defense funding. For the first two decades after its birth in 1948, Israel wasn’t an especially close friend of America. The US drew Israel close partly as a result of Cold War calculations, as the Soviet Union supported its Arab enemies in the 1960s and 1970s.

By the time the USSR collapsed in 1991, the US-Israel relationship had developed new underpinnings. American Jews, who became outspoken as antisemitism declined, expect Congress and the White House to keep Israel close. So do evangelical Christians, who believe Israel’s creation foretells the second coming of Christ. Their Republican leanings made support for Israel — originally a Democratic cause due to Jews’ links to the party and Israel’s early leftist orientation — bipartisan. Iran’s Islamic Revolution and attacks by Islamists on US targets, including those on Sept. 11, tended to make Americans unsympathetic to Israel’s enemies.

US-Israel ties have been strained by the war. While Biden has defended Israel’s right to pursue its goal of destroying Hamas, he’s called the military campaign in Gaza “over the top.” The war has stirred anti-Israel sentiment in the US, notably on college campuses. Still, Israel continues to enjoy popular support overall in the US. In a Pew poll conducted in February, 58% of respondents said Israel’s reasons for fighting Hamas were valid, versus 22% who validated Hamas’s reasons for fighting Israel. Twice as many respondents said they sympathized entirely or mostly with the Israelis as said they sympathized with the Palestinians.

Read more: How Israel-Hamas Protests Engulfed Elite US Colleges: QuickTake

15. Why does Iran support Hamas?

Since its Islamic revolution in 1979, Iran has rejected Israel’s very existence and worked to undermine it by funding, arming and training anti-Israeli militant groups such as Hamas. Israel has used its military to disrupt those efforts and to thwart Iran’s nuclear program, which it regards as an existential threat. The result has been a decades-old simmering conflict between the two countries, which has accelerated since Oct. 7. In an unprecedented act of overt aggression, Iran launched a massive barrage of missiles and drones against Israel April 13, provoking a more limited return attack April 19. While both assaults created minimal damage, the head-to-head fighting moved the Israel-Iran conflict into a more dangerous phase.

Read more: Understanding the Dangerous Israel-Iran Conflict: QuickTake

The Reference Shelf