This is Washington Edition, the newsletter about money, power and politics in the nation’s capital. Today, White House reporter Jordan Fabian looks at Joe Biden’s campaign kickoff. Sign up here and follow us at @bpolitics. Email our editors here.

The Opening Round

Republicans can’t stop talking about Donald Trump’s indictment, “woke” corporations and restricting abortion. Joe Biden is perfectly fine with that.

When the president stages his first 2024 campaign rally tomorrow in Philadelphia, don’t expect him to pummel Trump or fight the culture wars.

Instead, Biden’s campaign advisers say he plans to argue that he deserves a second term because, against all odds, the economy is humming along. Now there are a lot of variables that go into that, many beyond White House control. But Biden is happy to take credit.

That could be a risky strategy. Inflation remains high. Economists and investors still anticipate a recession later this year or next. If the economy crashes, history shows voters will take it out on the occupant of the White House.

Recent economic news, though, helps Biden’s pitch.

The country dodged a bullet when Biden and House Republicans agreed to raise the debt ceiling. Slowing inflation prompted the Federal Reserve to pause interest-rate hikes this week (though more could come later). Job growth surged in May. Consumer sentiment rose to a four-month high in June.

Most of all, focusing on the economy allows Biden to set up a choice for voters: the steady hand or the chaos agents.

Plenty of doubts remain about Biden. Americans are less than excited about the prospect of keeping him in the White House until he’s 86 years old. Many wonder if he is up for the rigors of a real campaign after he contested the 2020 race mostly remotely due to the pandemic.

Saturday’s rally seems tailor-made to give Biden an energy boost. He’ll speak in front of union members in his birth state, where he’s been called “Pennsylvania’s third senator.”

The only thing that would make Joe Biden more comfortable is a chocolate chip ice cream cone.

Don’t Miss

Expectations for inflation in the short term fell to a more than two-year low in early June, helping drive consumer sentiment higher than economists had forecast.

Two Federal Reserve officials said interest rates may have to rise further to tame price pressures that in some sectors of the economy aren’t showing much sign of easing.

Minneapolis police officers routinely rely on excessive and unjustified deadly force and discriminate based on race and disability, a Justice Department review triggered by the murder of George Floyd found.

A growing number of big-name companies are ratcheting up their return-to-office mandates a notch, calling employees back to their desks four days a week.

A billionaire conservative’s rebuff to Democrats questioning his luxurious trips and private real estate deals with Justice Clarence Thomas sets up a test of the Senate’s investigative tools.

Trump’s assertion that he had sole discretion to determine the status of documents he took from the White House is just the latest trial balloon for potential defense arguments.

A bipartisan proposal from two senators would give federal regulators new powers to claw back compensation of executives who led failed banks.

Watch & Listen

Today on Bloomberg TV’s Balance of Power at 5 p.m., hosts Joe Mathieu and Kailey Leinz talk to Gene Seroka, executive director of the Port of Los Angeles, about the tentative agreement with the dockworkers’ union. Yesterday on the show, Pimco Managing Director of Public Policy Libby Cantrill discussed the simmering tension in the House over the debt deal and budget debate.

The Credit Edge by Bloomberg Intelligence podcast looks at the trouble ahead for lenders as office landlords fall behind on debt payments and the impact of US culture wars on consumer companies. Listen on Apple Podcasts.

Chart of the Day

A surge in bill issuance and close to a $40 billion boost due to quarterly corporate tax payments have dramatically rebuild the Treasury's cash balance. The cash balance topped $250 billion on June 15, the most in a month. The Treasury expects that its cash pile, which is rebounding toward more normal levels in the wake of the recent deal to suspend the debt ceiling, will surpass $400 billion at the end of June. — Alex Tanzi

What’s Next

Secretary of State Antony Blinken leaves tonight for Beijing as the Biden administration tries to restore lines of communication with China.

Fed Chair Jerome Powell delivers his semi-annual monetary policy testimony to the House Financial Services Committee on Wednesday and the Senate Banking panel on Thursday.

Existing home sales for May are reported Thursday by the National Association of Realtors.

Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi will be the guest of honor at a White House state dinner on Thursday.

Trump plans to campaign July 1 in South Carolina, one of the early primary states.

The Juneteenth federal holiday is Monday; Congress is out and the government is closed. Washington Edition will resume on Tuesday.

Seen Elsewhere

A truck driver was convicted of killing 11 congregants at a Pittsburgh synagogue in 2018, the deadliest attack on Jews in U.S. history, the Associated Press reports.

Democrats are looking for a redo of redistricting in several states after the Supreme Court's ruling in an Alabama case, which could cost Republicans seats, Politico reports.

The personal data of millions of people in Louisiana and Oregon were compromised in a widespread cyberattack that also affected US government computers, according to CNN.

More From Bloomberg

And sign up for more Bloomberg newsletters at Bloomberg.com.