From the moment Yevgeny Prigozhin announced his plan to march with his mercenaries on Moscow to protest Russia’s failures in its war against Ukraine, he was probably living on borrowed time.

Two months later, his private jet spiraled out of the sky near Moscow and crashed in flames. Also on board was the Wagner Group’s second in command — and self-proclaimed founder — Dmitry Utkin.

Key Reading:

Putin Regains His Power With Russian Elite After Prigozhin Crash

Prigozhin, Wagner Mercenary Chief, Is Presumed Dead

Putin Appears Virtually at BRICS Following Prigozhin Jet Crash

Russian General Missing Since Wagner Mutiny Is Removed From Post

Read our rolling coverage of the war in Ukraine here.

In some ways, the news was startling. In others, it was utterly unsurprising.

Notably, Russian general Sergei Surovikin was recently removed from his post. He had been linked to the Wagner chief and the failed mutiny.

Russian President Vladimir Putin has long shown a ruthlessness in punishing those who betray him, be it sending goons to assassinate opponents and alleged traitors, stripping tycoons of their empires or condemning political rivals to prison.

The message is loud and clear, and aimed very much at a domestic audience. Putin, who is paving the way for another term in 2024 elections, is still in charge. And there will be no great indulgence of opposition to him or his war.

Importantly for the Russian president, there are no overt signs right now of broad dissent among the general public. Putin addressed a BRICS summit in South Africa by video without mentioning Prigozhin.

There are some unknowns for Putin, however. We don’t know if authorities can or will mop up the remnants of Wagner’s forces in Russia. Do those forces try and regroup (some of them at least have been fiercely loyal to Prigozhin), or do they vanish like the mercenary ghosts they are?

And are there any elites — be it in business or the military — willing to stick their neck out to take Putin on in his next term?

All coups need a champion. Putin may have staved off, for now, another one emerging.

Expand The crash site near the village of Kuzhenkino. Source: AP Photo

Check out today’s special early Washington Edition, in which Joshua Green assesses the debate last night among the candidates for the Republican presidential nomination. And if you are enjoying this newsletter, sign up here.

Global Headlines

Republican candidates battled each other over the economy in their first debate of the 2024 race, waging attacks on President Joe Biden’s policies while seeking to gain ground on the absent GOP frontrunner Donald Trump. Each of the eight contenders on stage in Milwaukee sought to break from the crowded field and present themselves as someone who could beat Biden in a general election, with many praising Trump but saying he couldn’t retake the White House.

Rudy Giuliani surrendered to Georgia authorities to be booked on charges that he conspired to keep Trump in office after he lost the 2020 election. The former New York mayor, who represented Trump in failed legal challenges to the result of the election, agreed to post a $150,000 bond in the case brought by Fulton County District Attorney Fani Willis after he, Trump and 17 others were indicted last week for violating state racketeering laws.

Trump’s former Chief of Staff Mark Meadows can’t avoid being arrested in the Georgia case if he fails to turn himself in by midday tomorrow, a federal judge ruled.

Expand

Shootings in Canada are soaring as American gun manufacturers push to export the weapons into private hands around the world. The number of semiautomatic pistols and assault rifles coming from the US to Canada each year has skyrocketed from just 6,205 in 2003 to more than 66,000 in 2022. Over the same two decades, the country’s annual rate of shootings per capita — incidents referred to as “discharge firearm with intent” — surged almost sevenfold.

Best of Bloomberg Opinion

Major emerging market nations invited top oil exporter Saudi Arabia, Iran, Egypt, Argentina, Ethiopia and the United Arab Emirates to join the BRICS bloc in a push to expand its global influence. Leaders from Brazil, Russia, India, China and South Africa agreed to expand the group from Jan. 1 at a summit being held this week in Johannesburg, South African President Cyril Ramaphosa said, for its first expansion since 2010.

Spain’s self-exiled leader of Catalan separatists has suddenly found himself back with a starring role in the country’s latest political drama. Carles Puigdemont fled in 2017 to escape arrest after spearheading a botched attempt to unilaterally declare independence for Catalonia. Following an inconclusive Spanish election in late July, the former journalist and the party he leads hold the key to who will get to form the next government.

Explainers You Can Use

Thailand’s Srettha Thavisin may soon find that winning the prime minister’s job was easier than running a coalition government made up of 11 parties previously seen as sworn enemies. After three months of post-election haggling, the mix of populist and conservative parties is likely to be shaky since it was born out of a deal that centered around the return after 15 years of exile of former premier Thaksin Shinawatra.

Tune in to Bloomberg TV’s Balance of Power at 5pm to 6pm ET weekdays with Washington correspondents Annmarie Hordern and Joe Mathieu. You can watch and listen on Bloomberg channels and online here.

News to Note

North Korea again failed to put a spy satellite into orbit when its rocket suffered trouble soon after launch.

China suspended all seafood imports from Japan after Tokyo began releasing treated wastewater from the Fukushima nuclear site into the Pacific Ocean.

The Biden administration is in talks with Venezuela to explore a temporary lifting of crippling economic sanctions in exchange for President Nicolas Maduro allowing fair elections next year, sources say.

Australia faces economic losses of as much as $274 billion in reduced productivity unless extreme climate change is addressed, a government report found.

Argentina's economic activity contracted for a fourth straight month in June, signaling impending recession amid the political uncertainty of an election year.

And finally ... A wildfire in the national park north of Greece’s capital roared back overnight, covering much of Athens with smoke, and could get worse as wind speeds are expected to pick up. Authorities are fighting 55 blazes, including one in the northeastern region of Evros that killed 18 migrants as it swept through a forest. This summer has seen extreme temperatures, violent storms, flooding and wildfires across Europe and North America.

Expand Fire approaches the village of Avantas, northeast of Alexandroupolis, Greece, on Monday. Photographer: Konstantinos Tsakalidis/Bloomberg

More from Bloomberg

Washington Edition for exclusive coverage on how the worlds of money and politics intersect in the US capital

Economics Daily for what the changing landscape means for policy makers, investors and you

Supply Lines for daily insights into supply chains and globe trade

Bw Daily for unique perspectives, original reporting and insightful analysis from Businessweek’s renowned journalists

Green Daily for the latest in climate news, zero-emission tech and green finance

Explore more newsletters at Bloomberg.com.