Welcome to the Bloomberg Surveillance newsletter, a daily look at the best interviews and insights from Bloomberg Television and Radio’s flagship morning show. Sign up here if you’re not yet a subscriber.

Dangers lurk outside the bubble

If the collective sentiment at Davos is always wrong, we should be worried.

As we finish up this year’s World Economic Forum confab and the security barriers start coming down, it’s worth reflecting on the main takeaways. The vibe was unbridled optimism in every corner of finance and business. Bankers from Stifel Financial Corp. to JPMorgan Chase & Co. offered grand dreams for a rebound after a drought of initial public offerings, mergers and riskier debt sales. CEOs from Coca-Cola Co. and Dow Chemical Co. to Qualcomm Inc. and China's Trip.com also sounded rosy.

This worries me because if you talk to executives in private, they agree that Davos is a bubble of privilege and myopic thought, and pretty much every year the consensus ends up being exactly the opposite of what happens. (Think back to 2023, when everyone predicted a US recession.)

To the extent that these C-suite folks have visibility, it seems things do look good. After all, this week’s US retail sales data showed more robust spending. Jobless claims came in yesterday at the lowest level since September 2022. The problem is there’s a sense that markets are priced to perfection, as Bridgewater’s Greg Jensen told Jon on a panel this week.

First, there’s the issue of interest-rate cuts. A lot of Wall Street’s optimism — certainly when it comes to banking — hinges on the idea that borrowing is getting cheaper. If the economy looks so great, it gets harder to see why the Federal Reserve would aggressively lower rates. A Fed cutting too soon and then backtracking would create huge problems.

Second, in stark opposition to all that business exuberance, there was a depressed feeling among the generals, foreign ministers and policy wonks on hand. The ongoing war in Ukraine loomed large for many. So did Israel’s war with Hamas. The Houthis’ attacks on Red Sea shipping are stoking fears that the Mideast conflict will boil over.

In private discussions, officials said it’s hard to see a path for resolving those conflicts in the near term. In the meantime, they’re gaming out ways to keep the lid on. Jim Breyer of Breyer Capital talked about speaking to military leaders about artificial intelligence and ways to deploy it in combat. Welcome to the new arms race.

While there was a good deal of alarm over Donald Trump’s possible return to the White House, there was an acknowledgment that trade policy under President Joe Biden hasn't been that different from Trump's. In fact, there was a further push from many different governments to support their national interests before thinking about expanding their multilateral reach.

So as top business leaders foresaw growth and prosperity, you could find a reality check in the battalions of police officers marching through the Davos promenade and the sharpshooters positioned on rooftops, protecting leaders of countries that are at war. There are a lot of potential risks to this nirvana moment in markets. Investors don't know how to price that, so they're largely ignoring it instead.

It’s all about earnings

So with three days of shows done and dusted from Davos — where Jon and I were joined by Bloomberg’s Annmarie Hordern — today’s Surveillance was anchored by Manus Cranny and Scarlet Fu in New York. Earnings were a dominant theme, especially as we head into the two busiest weeks of the season.

“Equity investors have a specific set of expectations. There’s an expectation that we’ll see a resilient economy with resilient consumer spending and a pickup in earnings growth,” said David Lefkowitz at UBS Global Wealth Management. “If that comes through, then markets can grind higher.”

Equity investors are focused on what they’re hearing — or are about to hear — from CEOs rather than sweating the recent leg up in benchmark US Treasury yields, BNP Paribas Asset Management’s Daniel Morris said.

“Earnings optimism can outweigh, temporarily at least, what the impact is on higher discount rates,” he said. Tech, again, is likely to be a focal point, with earnings growth of at least 10% across the Nasdaq 100, he said. “That’s why the enthusiasm is there.”

Allspring Global Investments’ Margie Patel suggested that the Magnificent Seven would again outperform. “The reason they’ve been magnificent is they’ve had better earnings growth than other sectors,” she said.

Meanwhile, UBS’s Lefkowitz and Gina Martin Adams of Bloomberg Intelligence suggested that profit improvements outside the Magnificent Seven tech stocks will finally start catching up in 2024. Tesla Inc. kicks off the reports from the tech megcaps next week.

The Trump effect in Congress

Donald Trump’s success in the Iowa caucuses only adds to his sway over Republicans in Washington. That’s an important dynamic as the primaries unfold against the backdrop of House Speaker Mike Johnson’s uneasy rule over a fractious GOP caucus, even with the latest short-term spending bill, according to Wendy Schiller at Brown University’s Taubman Center for American Politics and Policy.

“Trump doesn’t want the GOP to look like it can’t run the country. If he’s the nominee, he wants to run with a strong GOP at his back,” Schiller said. “You can imagine Trump will be on the phone with Johnson every single day saying don’t make me look bad.”

The interplay between the 2024 campaign and Washington’s budget gridlock isn’t a good omen. The new deadlines for a spending blueprint are March 1 and March 8 — potentially when the primaries are at their hottest.

Maya MacGuineas of the Committee for a Responsible Federal Budget said Americans should take only small comfort in avoiding a government shutdown. After all, the temporary deal was necessary because there is still no budget for a fiscal year that began Oct. 1.

“When you’re running a country with two parties more intent on killing each other than actually running the country, you have a lot of problems,” she said.

More from Surveillance

Bloomberg Surveillance is live weekdays from 6 to 9 a.m. New York time. Watch on Bloomberg Television, on the Terminal at TV<GO> and on YouTube; or listen to the show on Bloomberg Radio and RADI<GO> from 7 to 10 a.m. You can watch full episodes and subscribe to the Bloomberg Surveillance podcast. Check out GTV<GO> for all the charts seen on Bloomberg Television.

More from Bloomberg