This is Washington Edition, the newsletter about money, power and politics in the nation’s capital. Today, senior Washington correspondent Saleha Mohsin talks for her podcast with a former Defense official about the US military’s use of artificial intelligence for the battlefield. Sign up here and follow us at @bpolitics. Email our editors here.

Battlefield Technology

In 2017, the US military embarked on a project to bring artificial intelligence to warfare. The former Defense official who pitched what’s now called Project Maven told Bloomberg about Big Tech’s capabilities to scan photos and identify objects on the battlefield.

The journey to build it wasn’t easy, and big questions remain about whether the US military should even be using programs with automatic target recognition in combat. It didn’t help that there’s little room for innovation at the Pentagon, said Will Roper, who worked in the Department of Defense’s strategic capabilities office when he pitched the idea.

“Skeptics are pretty much what fill the halls of the Pentagon,” Roper says on the Big Take DC podcast. But adapting what Silicon Valley had to offer for the military seemed obvious to him.

Listen • 20m41 Inside the US Military’s Mysterious AI Project (Podcast) Arrow Right 20:41

“A lot of what industry was trying to do — being able to identify buildings and roads and objects — it seemed very traceable to battlefield analogs,” he said. Identifying a car isn’t different from identifying a tank, he said.

By 2020, the army was running live ammunition exercises using the computer algorithm at the 18th Airborne Corps in North Carolina. That unit is now the largest operational test bed for Project Maven, Bloomberg’s Katrina Manson reports in a behind the scenes look at the program.

But autonomous weapons systems aren’t perfect yet. While humans at the 18th Airborne Corps can correctly identify a tank 84% of the time, Maven gets it closer to 60%. And experts say that number goes down to 30% on a snowy day. While the US military sees it improving, countries like Ukraine and Israel that are currently in conflict are using similar technology.

That’s triggered a big debate in US military and defense circles: Is the world ready for AI in war?

Download and subscribe to the Big Take DC podcast on iHeart, Apple Podcasts, Spotify, Bloomberg Carplay, or wherever you listen. Each week on the show, I’ll share one story about how money, politics and power shape Washington — and the consequences for people in America and all over the world.

Don’t Miss

The House passed a temporary funding bill to avert a partial US government shutdown on Saturday, sending the bill to the Senate for a vote as soon as tonight.

President Joe Biden wants the Group of Seven nations to make progress on plans to tap frozen Russian sovereign assets to help support Ukraine by the time the leaders meet in June.

Groups allied with Biden have already committed to spending more than $700 million to help him win the November election while Donald Trump’s campaign continues to bleed money.

A brutal market for many commercial property owners means Trump faces significant losses in his real estate empire if he has to unload assets to cover a massive verdict against him.

Trump is expected to remain on the Illinois primary ballot as a state judge has agreed to pause her ruling barring the former president for his role in the insurrection at the US Capitol on Jan. 6.

The Federal Reserve’s preferred gauge of underlying inflation rose in January at the fastest pace in nearly a year, helping explain policymakers’ patient approach to start cutting interest rates.

Americans are having a harder time getting approved for auto loans, as banks worry over the risk of defaults at a time when high interest rates and elevated car prices are squeezing budgets.

The US will investigate potential data and cybersecurity risks posed by Chinese electric vehicles and other internet-connected cars, aiming to act before their manufacturers expand into American markets.

China is increasing its military capabilities in space at a “breathtaking pace” to counter American satellites and improve its ability to monitor and target forces on Earth, according to the head of the US Space Command.

An influential Federal Reserve official says she backs plans to significantly increase capital requirements for the largest US banks, which has drawn fierce pushback from Wall Street financial institutions.

Watch & Listen

Today on Bloomberg Television's Balance of Power early edition at 1 p.m., hosts Joe Mathieu and Kailey Leinz talked with Eli Yokley of Morning Consult about the latest Bloomberg News/Morning Consult swing-state poll on the presidential race.

On the program at 5 p.m., they talk with No. 2 Senate Democrat Dick Durbin about aid for Ukraine and Israel, immigration and a new push for voting rights legislation.

On the Odd Lots podcast, Bloomberg's Tracy Alloway and Joe Weisenthal talk with Omair Sharif, founder and president of Inflation Insights, as well as Skanda Amarnath, executive director of Employ America, about the different ways to measure inflation and some of the quirks underneath the surface. Listen on iHeart, Apple Podcasts and Spotify.

Chart of the Day

Shippers are increasingly avoiding the Red Sea due to attacks by Yemen-based Houthi militants. Estimated Red Sea shipping transit volumes are down 56% from Feb. 1 to 25, after dropping 45% in January, according to daily satellite tracking of vessels. Tanker traffic has been particularly affected, according to the IMF Port Watch data. Roughly 145 million metric tons of goods carried by 1,700 ships have been diverted away from the Red Sea — an estimated 1.3% of 2023 global maritime trade — since mid-December. — Alex Tanzi

What’s Next

US factory orders for January will be reported at 10 a.m. Tuesday

The Super Tuesday round of 15 state primaries is Tuesday.

Job openings in January will be reported at 10 a.m. on Wednesday.

Federal Reserve Chair Jerome Powell testifies before the House Financial Services Committee on Wednesday and the Senate Banking on Thursday.

The weekly initial jobless claims report is due at 8:30 a.m. Thursday.

Biden is scheduled to deliver his State of the Union address Thursday.

The Republican convention is July 15-18 in Milwaukee

The Democratic convention is Aug. 19-22 in Chicago

Seen Elsewhere

Federal investigators have found that US nursing homes are still plagued by staffing shortages, employee burnout and flawed infection control procedures, the New York Times reports.

Political rights and civil liberties receded in 52 countries last year and only about one in five people in the world live in a country considered free, according to a Freedom House report cited by Axios.

The National Park Service forecasts Washington’s cherry blossoms, a major draw for tourists to the nation’s capital, will reach peak bloom from March 23 to 26, according to the Washington Post.

More From Bloomberg

And sign up for more Bloomberg newsletters at Bloomberg.com.