Welcome to Balance of Power, bringing you the latest in global politics. If you haven’t yet, sign up here.

European Union leaders balked earlier this year at a plan to raise an extra €100 billion ($109 billion) from a joint bond issuance.

Yet the real cost of defending their eastern borders from Russia is likely to be many times higher, however it’s funded.

While the wars in Ukraine and Gaza have taken center stage, the surge in military budgets is a global phenomenon — a sign the world is entering a new arms race.

With China also ramping up its military spending and increasing cooperation with the Kremlin, security officials say that to keep pace, the US and its allies may need to push their defense budgets back to Cold War levels.

That would consume as much as 4% of gross domestic product. If the US and the rest of the Group of Seven were to do that, it would amount to some $10 trillion of additional outlays over the next decade, according to analysis by Bloomberg Economics. It would be a boon to defense companies, yet would severely affect public finances.

Much of the EU’s post-pandemic debt consolidation would be stalled by even just meeting NATO’s target of at least 2% of annual GDP for military expenditure.

Doubling that goal would pile further pressure on large countries like Spain and Italy that still fall far short, while confronting the bloc’s weaker nations with particularly painful choices between more borrowing, budget cuts or tax increases.

A searing political question in the years ahead will be how a remilitarized world can reconcile such commitments with finite tax revenues and growing welfare and health needs.

Germany is a case in point: It’s set to spend €7 billion on two new naval frigates and hundreds of armored vehicles, even while flirting with recession.

The grim security outlook for the next decade suggests there will be plenty more such tough decisions to come.

Expand Ukrainian troops drive toward the eastern city of Lyman on March 9. Photographer: Jose Colon/Anadolu /Getty Images

Global Must Reads

Amid signs of progress in negotiations for a cease-fire in Gaza that would include the release of Israeli hostages and Palestinian prisoners, far-right ministers in Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu’s cabinet threatened to bring down the government. International pressure for a deal has intensified since an Israeli missile strike killed seven aid workers delivering food to displaced Palestinians a week ago.

Iran’s mastery of drone technology — at least a dozen countries are using it — is earning foreign currency to fund its defense industry, strengthening its strategic alliances, and making it a formidable arms dealer. As this report shows, nations from Central Asia to South America are building their own weapons based on Iranian designs — often with US components.

UK Foreign Secretary David Cameron flew to Florida to meet Donald Trump as part of efforts to convince the Republican presidential candidate’s allies in the US House to support further military aid for Ukraine. Trump, who’s facing an electoral rematch against President Joe Biden in November, has expressed skepticism about providing weapons to Kyiv.

US Treasury Secretary Janet Yellen warned Chinese banks that they could face sanctions if they help channel military or dual-use goods to Russia’s military as she wrapped up four days of talks in China. The Biden administration is trying to crack down on firms worldwide that help Russia evade sanctions that the US and its allies have imposed on Moscow.

South Africa has spent more than a year frustrating its biggest trade partner and largest foreign investor, the EU, by failing to respond to requests for a high-level summit, sources say. The delay is fueling concern among Western powers that Pretoria is turning increasingly toward Russia and China and neglecting relations with the US and European nations.

China is sending its highest-level delegation to North Korea in almost five years for a trip starting Thursday that comes as Pyongyang has drawn closer to Russia.

Inflation, reining in housing prices and bolstering South Korea’s export-driven and slowing economy are the top issues for voters in tomorrow’s parliamentary elections that could determine how much power President Yoon Suk Yeol wields for the rest of his term.

A bipartisan group of US senators urged Biden to punish Venezuela’s Nicolas Maduro for attacks against his top opposition rival, saying that an upcoming election fails to meet the promise of a free and fair vote.

Bulgarian President Rumen Radev appointed an interim cabinet to prepare the Balkan country for a snap election in June, the sixth ballot in just over three years.

Washington Dispatch

Trump’s announcement that abortion policy ought to be left up to the states has forced opponents of the procedure to interpret what it might mean for the 2024 election and beyond. “At the end of the day, this is all about the will of the people,” the former president said yesterday in a video on his Truth Social platform. Anti-abortion activists had urged him to advocate a national ban even as polls show a majority of voters back abortion rights.

His former vice president, Mike Pence, responded in a post on X that Trump’s “retreat on the Right to Life is a slap in the face to the millions of pro-life Americans who voted for him in 2016 and 2020.” Marjorie Dannenfelser, the president of Susan B. Anthony Pro-Life America, said in a statement that “unborn children and their mothers deserve national protections and national advocacy from the brutality of the abortion industry.”

Yet in a series of posts on X, Kristan Hawkins, the president of Students for Life of America, took a more nuanced approach, arguing that a federal standard might undermine state efforts to, say, ban the procedure when a heartbeat could be detected. She concluded: “Trump made the right call — and this leaves room for better action to be taken down the road.”

One thing to watch today: House Republicans return to the Capitol after a two-week recess with Speaker Mike Johnson facing a possible move by Representative Marjorie Taylor Greene to oust him.

Sign up for the Washington Edition newsletter for more from the US capital and watch Balance of Power at 1 and 5 p.m. ET weekdays on Bloomberg Television.

Chart of the Day

A vital component in rechargeable batteries, lithium has been thrust into the global spotlight as one of the world’s most important commodities. The boom and bust in prices of the past three years has exposed a once-niche and tiny market that is evolving and adjusting to the unprecedented rollout of electric vehicles across the globe.

And Finally

When Muhammad Aurangzeb became Pakistan’s finance minister last month, some former banking colleagues saw it as far from a dream job. The economy is enduring the most turbulent period in its history, lurching from one bailout program to the next. Aurangzeb’s role in Prime Minister Shehbaz Sharif’s government is to try and fix the problems dodged by successive administrations, all while navigating the country’s volatile politics. “You have to get out of your comfort zone,” he said in an interview.

Expand A market in Islamabad on March 30. Photographer: Asad Zaidi/Bloomberg

More from Bloomberg