Speaker Mike Johnson has had a bad, very, very bad, awful time leading the House Republican conference.

Let us count the ways.

Or rather, let Representative Thomas Massie count the ways:

“Getting rid of Speaker McCarthy has officially turned into an unmitigated disaster. All work on separate spending bills has ceased. Spending reductions have been traded for spending increases,” the Kentucky Republican tweeted last week. “Warrantless spying has been temporarily extended. Our majority has shrunk.”

The thing is, that tweet came before what has truly been Johnson’s absolute worst week.

The Johnson-led House fumbled a vote to increase the state-and-local tax (SALT) deduction, a priority for New York Republicans. The state will be pivotal in determining who controls the House.

On Tuesday, the party lost a special election to replace disgraced Representative George Santos in New York’s Third District. (Perhaps this is why Johnson had “real reservations” about ousting Santos?). The loss shrinks Republicans’ already-slim majority in the House. And some observers view the race as a bellwether for November.

The White House denied Johnson’s request to meet with President Joe Biden to discuss border security after the speaker (on Donald Trump’s orders) helped tank a bipartisan bill that would have been a huge step in fixing the problem.

Funding for Ukraine and Israel are in doubt after Johnson said his conference wouldn’t back a Senate approved bill because it didn’t include border security. (Remember, Johnson rejected a hawkish bipartisan border security bill last week).

Johnson had to pull a spy powers bill, for a second time, after disagreements in his conference.

And Representative Mark Green of Tennessee, head of the powerful House Homeland Security Committee, became the fifth chair to announce that he won’t seek reelection, citing his frustration at the lack of progress on...anything.

House Republicans did manage to impeach DHS Secretary Alejandro Mayorkas after blowing it last week in another embarrassing defeat for Johnson. He’d failed the simple task of counting to make sure the votes were there before the motion hit the floor. But the impeachment is likely dead on arrival in the Senate, making the House action symbolic at best.

"This place is so broken, and making a difference here is just you know, just it feels like a lot of something for nothing," Green told Axios.

Paging Kevin McCarthy anyone?

It is hard to say whether McCarthy would be any better than Johnson at this job of herding cats on crack. McCarthy and his predecessors had experience in leadership and fundraising and many more years in the House, and they still failed. But McCarthy, knew, for instance, that one should whip a vote before putting it on the floor. As in, count the votes to make sure you have the votes before embarrassing yourself in front of the entire country.

Johnson, a former backbencher, is now one of the most powerful Republicans in the country. He’s second in line to the presidency and is, along with Trump, the face of the GOP.

Ideally, he and his conference would be conveying to American voters a coherent and positive message about how they would govern. Ideally, they’d present a case to voters that their majorities should grow. Instead they are beholden to Trump’s many whims. And the message they are conveying is that they’re incapable of governing. Fox News’ Brit Hume said House Republicans risk looking like “a do-nothing Congress.” Right-wing podcaster Ben Shapiro urged Johnson to “pass some stuff”otherwise the party is “cruising for a bruising in November.”

But the House Republican conference has become an ungovernable hot mess, devoid of ideas and accomplishments. It’s merely an appendage of Trump. As a result, little progress has been made even on the priorities that Republicans claim they have.

Newly-elected Democrat Tom Suozzi, who now threatens Johnson’s majority after flipping Santos’ seat, had some advice for his future (and former) colleagues.

“Let’s send a message to our friends running the Congress these days,” Suozzi said in his victory night remarks.“Stop running around for Trump and start running the country.”

It’s true. The Republican party is now the party of Trump’s ego and his id. And as long as that remains the case, it and its leaders will be unable to govern or articulate a clear vision for the country. Good luck, Speaker Johnson. And to whoever might replace you.

Elsewhere in Bloomberg Opinion:

Biden’s Age Haunts His Appearances — and the Election: Nia-Malika Henderson

Who’s Going to Want to Work for the President Now?: Patricia Lopez

Hawaii Rightly Rejects Supreme Court’s Gun Nonsense: Francis Wilkinson

Want more Bloomberg Opinion? Subscribe to our newsletter.