Welcome to Balance of Power, bringing you the latest in global politics. If you haven’t yet, sign up here.

Ukraine faces a decisive year in the war to defeat Russia’s invasion, according to Andriy Yermak, a top aide to President Volodymyr Zelenskiy. It’s not only the war-battered nation’s destiny at stake.

Strains are increasing within the US-led coalition backing Kyiv, testing its credibility in demonstrating the long-term will and capacity to defend democratic values and sovereign allies.

That’s being watched in other flashpoint areas such as the Caucasus region, where the Azerbaijan-Armenia conflict still simmers, and the South China Sea as tensions mount between Beijing and the Philippines, which has a US security guarantee.

Germany admits the European Union won’t reach a target of supplying Ukraine with 1 million artillery rounds by the end of March, while members Hungary and now Slovakia are vocal dissenters over continuing EU support for Kyiv.

Bitter domestic political divisions are calling the commitment of the US into question. The next tranche of support for Ukraine’s military is being held up as Republicans and Democrats wrangle over a funding bill to avert a federal government shutdown within days.

Republican contenders to challenge Joe Biden in next year’s US presidential elections are split over whether even to continue backing Ukraine against Russia. The Israel-Hamas war is drawing attention away from Ukraine, too.

Russian President Vladimir Putin’s army is digging in as the Kremlin adopts a strategy of waiting for war fatigue to magnify the divisions among Ukraine’s allies and increase pressure on Kyiv for territorial concessions.

Ukraine’s counteroffensive to oust Russian forces from occupied territory continues to make slow progress in what military Commander-in-Chief Valeriy Zaluzhnyi recently called a “stalemate.”

Yermak said the war is approaching a “turning point” as he sought to bolster US and allied support for victory against Russia.

Just how the war turns will have consequences far beyond Ukraine.

Expand Volodymyr Zelenskiy. Photographer: Drew Angerer/Getty Images

Global Must Reads

Prime Minister Rishi Sunak’s decision to bring back David Cameron to government rehabilitates a centrist ex-premier who campaigned to stay in the EU. But as Alex Wickham and Kitty Donaldson show, it’s a gamble that has opened a rift in the ruling Conservative Party that’s likely to dog the Tories and Sunak all the way to the next UK general election.

Biden urged Israel to take “less intrusive action” at the al Shifa hospital — the latest sign the US wants fewer civilian casualties in the Israeli invasion of Gaza. Israel says Hamas, designated a terrorist organization by the US and the EU, uses hospitals as bases for its operations.

Expand Rescuers look for survivors in Khan Yunis in Gaza on Sunday. Photographer: Mahmud Hams/AFP/Getty Images

The new Republican speaker of the US House of Representatives is counting on Democrats to win approval of his proposal to avert a government shutdown this weekend. Mike Johnson plans a vote today that requires a two-thirds majority, something his party does not have. Democrats don’t like the measure because it leaves out emergency funding for Israel and Ukraine and threatens a two-step shutdown next year.

Biden and Chinese President Xi Jinping are set to announce an agreement that would see Beijing crack down on the manufacture and export of fentanyl, sources say, potentially delivering the US president a major victory in tackling a key driver of the US opioid crisis. In return, Washington would lift restrictions on China’s forensic police institute, which the US alleges is responsible for human-rights abuses.

Liberians head to the polls today for a run-off vote to choose either President George Weah or ex-Vice President Joseph Boakai as leader of the West African nation. A former AC Milan striker and World Footballer of the Year, Weah faces a tight contest after both candidates secured just less than 44% support in last month’s election, with corruption scandals and high food prices eroding his popularity.

Turkey’s parliament is set to hold a debate this week over Sweden’s bid to join NATO, as President Recep Tayyip Erdogan seeks to improve defense relations with US-led allies.

The US Supreme Court’s new code of conduct largely copies ethics guidelines in place for lower court judges, but not on key issues such as enforcement, conflicts of interest and what behavior crosses the line into misconduct.

Thailand’s prime minister, Srettha Thavisin, said there’s no plan to invite Chinese police officers to patrol local tourist destinations, after reports about such a program created a furor.

Washington Dispatch

The release today of the consumer price index for October will be closely watched by investors and economists for how it might affect decisions by US Federal Reserve policymakers when they meet next month.

The Federal Reserve Bank of New York found yesterday that consumers’ near-term inflation expectations dropped slightly in October while their outlook about their finances was mixed. Median one-year-ahead inflation expectations dropped slightly last month to 3.6% from September, according to the New York Fed.

One thing to watch today: The House is due to vote on a temporary spending plan that would keep the US government running.

Sign up for the Washington Edition newsletter for more from the US capital and watch Balance of Power at 5pm ET weekdays on Bloomberg Television.

Chart of the Day

Xi’s sweeping anti-graft drive is on track to ensnare a record number of senior cadres this year, showing the Chinese leader still appears wary of possible threats to his authority after securing a precedent-defying third term. Beijing has announced graft probes into 41 senior officials since January, matching the previous high in 2014.

And Finally

Qatar has the largest air-conditioned outdoor jogging tracks in the world, while across the United Arab Emirates, water is so cheap some people run the shower just to listen to it. But as Nayla Razzouk and Olivia Rudgard report, behavior is going to have to change radically if the Gulf countries are going to meet their climate goals while accommodating swelling populations that are key to economic growth in a region that has long relied on state-owned oil for income.

Expand Ski Dubai, a 22,500-square-meter indoor ski resort in the Mall of the Emirates. Photographer: Natalie Naccache/Bloomberg

More from Bloomberg