Welcome to the Bloomberg Surveillance newsletter, a daily look at the best interviews and insights from Bloomberg Television and Radio’s flagship morning show. Jonathan Ferro, Annmarie Hordern and I are in Davos this week. Sign up here if you’re not yet a subscriber.

‘That is actually funny’

Sure, Wall Street has sobered up a bit since the happy-days-are-here-again moments of late 2023. Equities are going nowhere. Yields on US 10-year Treasuries sport a 4% handle again. There’s definitely less oomph behind the conviction of Federal Reserve rate cuts as soon as March.

And yet to hear Cantor Fitzgerald’s Howard Lutnick tell it, investors aren’t even close to the reality of a Fed that has seen inflation fall since the rate-hiking cycle began but isn’t anywhere close to easing off in the face of continuing price pressure.

“The market is now calling for a 175 basis-point cut by the Fed — really,” Lutnick said, stretching out that last word and raising his voice for emphasis. “How about this: No way. No way at all. That is just nonsense.”

Bundled up and his breath visible in the cold air at the outdoor Surveillance set at the World Economic Forum in Davos, Switzerland, Lutnick was a high-energy interview brimming with optimism about Wall Street in 2024 (“The banks are going to trade really well. They’re going to have good numbers all year long.”), the end of the zero-rate era (“if you’re 62 like me, you know that’s manufactured nonsense.”) and the state of trading (“this market is excellent.”)

But his strongest words may have been reserved for the consensus around the rate cuts that equity traders crave to extend 2023’s smashing rally. If the Fed errs in this fraught moment, Lutnick said, “they will get it wrong by staying higher for longer. And I think that is likely to occur.”

In case anyone didn’t get his point, he also used the word “laughable” at one point and said: “175 basis points — I think that is actually funny.”

Harvard University’s Ken Rogoff had a similarly direct take.

Eventually, he said, the Fed may bring down its benchmark rate to the 3.5% range, from the current 5.25%. But not any time soon, and certainly not in an economy that Wall Street widely expects to be headed for a soft landing.

“What happens in the next year — that six rate cuts, that is a pipe dream,” he said. “That is not happening.”

Of course — wait for it — there’s another scenario. The Fed could cut a lot if there’s a deep recession. “That definitely could happen,” Rogoff said.

Pondering Trump 2.0 in Davos

It was a surprise to approximately no one that Donald Trump swept the Iowa caucuses. And with Trump inching closer to the Republican presidential nomination, Davos attendees were increasingly concerned about the global implications of a pivot back to Trump from President Joe Biden’s more-traditional US leadership.

“Extreme volatility,” Harvard’s Rogoff said. Pimco’s Libby Cantrill said: “Much more of a retrenchment, much more protectionism, which as we know, as we saw in the first Trump administration, will keep the market on its toes.”

“I can’t control elections. I can’t control the markets per se,” Nuveen Securities’ Jose Minaya said. “I’ve learned to move away from that noise and focus on what we do well, and anticipate volatility.”

Here in the Swiss Alps, surrounded by market participants, CEOs, scholars, government officials and others with a vested interest in globalism, it was jolting to hear the what-if-he-wins discussion. Trump’s 2024 campaign didn’t materialize out of thin air. And as a number of Surveillance guests noted, US allies seem to have done little since Trump’s disruptive first term to buffer themselves against a repeat.

Europe was caught off-guard across multiple levels by Vladimir Putin’s invasion of Ukraine, especially its dependence on Russian energy. The region also got hammered by its reliance on China to soak up exports — and Xi Jinping’s crackdown on private enterprise and sword-rattling at Taiwan is making the country uninvestible.

Bloomberg’s Annmarie Hordern, who is with us this week, recalled the plaintive remarks by UK Defense Minister James Heappey at the Warsaw Security Forum in October, pleading with NATO allies to bump up military spending with a war already raging in Europe.

As Rogoff noted, the world already is a fraught place even without the prospect of a rerun of the to-ing and fro-ing from Trump 1.0.

“The geopolitical situation — like nothing I’ve seen in my professional lifetime,” Rogoff said. “We’re in Cold War II. It could get to be a hotter Cold War II than it was. That’s very destabilizing. Think about what the ’70s were like.”

… And the 2024 race is on to New Hampshire

All eyes are on New Hampshire.

That’s the state of play in the US presidential race after Trump trounced runners-up Ron DeSantis and Nikki Haley. “If Donald Trump wins New Hampshire,” Pimco’s Cantrill said, “it is basically over.”

Here’s why: Haley is pushing hard in New Hampshire, whose Jan. 23 first-in-the-US primary has a history of upsetting the political apple cart. “I think we need to see something very definitive out of New Hampshire in terms of her momentum,” Cantrill said. “And if we don’t, again, I think it’s likely this Republican nomination could be over before it really begins, and it would be Donald Trump again as the very likely nominee.”

Expand Nikki Haley’s third-place finish in Iowa heaps on even more pressure for her to break through in New Hampshire. Photographer: Rachel Mummey/Bloomberg

Pangaea Policy’s Terry Haines isn’t ready to call the race quite yet. Iowa’s Republican turnout was paltry, at half of 2016’s level, in the face of arctic weather, he noted. And Trump’s 51% showing still means that almost half of Republicans want someone else other than the former president.

“This is not over for Trump by any means,” Haines said.

Of course, that means someone has to prove Trump’s vulnerability by actually winning. That’s why a dominant Trump showing in New Hampshire would wreck the Haley and DeSantis cases for picking another nominee, especially with no GOP primaries until South Carolina — Haley’s home state — for another month.

“You’ll all see them in Midtown Manhattan very soon because there’s going to be a lot of fundraising,” Haines said.

Around Davos

Quick hits from what we saw and heard on Surveillance as we started three days in Davos:

More from Surveillance

More from Bloomberg