Good afternoon from Los Angeles, where I’ve returned after a few weeks on the road. The biggest cultural story in Europe was not the writers strike or the Trump town hall but a soccer star (Vinicius Jr.) who has been subject to racist taunts all season.

There is a long history of racism in European soccer, and this story blew up in part because Vini plays for one of the world’s premiere clubs, Real Madrid. It didn’t help that the head of the Spanish soccer league criticized Vini.

It also mushroomed because of Spain’s relative inexperience discussing race. When I studied abroad in Madrid more than a decade ago, some classmates and I prepared a presentation on Spike Lee’s Do The Right Thing. This movie is one of the most important films about race relations ever made. And yet, the feedback from the professor was that we spent too much of our presentation talking about race.

Three things you need to know

The cost of women’s sports broadcast rights is poised to soar. ESPN might have to pay more than $100 million alone for the college basketball playoffs.

Jemele Hill is leaving Spotify, the latest major podcaster to depart the Swedish audio giant.

Hollywood studios have agreed to a tentative deal with the directors union that will increases wages and foreign residuals. All eyes now turn to the actors.

Indie Films Are the Latest Casualty of the Streaming Wars

The indie movie business is praying for its Top Gun moment.

While studios have lured movie fans back to theaters with blockbusters like Top Gun: Maverick and Avatar: The Way of Water, independent distributors and art-house cinemas are having no such luck. Most of the prestige titles from last year were box-office flops, and no art-house movie has cracked $20 million in the US this year.

Smaller movies are struggling to attract viewers at the same time Hollywood is cutting spending and taking fewer risks, all of which has frightened the world of independent film. Sales agents, producers and financiers at this years Cannes Film Festival all bemoaned how hard it is to raise money for new movies.

“Award-winning films out of Sundance or out of Berlin are selling for $0,” producer Shant Joshi said during a panel I moderated at the festival. By this he means buyers are unwilling to provide an advance against future earnings.

Tens of thousands of people come to Cannes every year to participate in the world’s most global film market. If you are an independent producer or studio, you fund your film by raising money from financiers, selling distribution rights in certain territories and convincing streaming services to buy the rights to show your movie after it leaves theaters.

Producers hire sales agents who spend hours every day meeting with potential financiers and distributors to piece together the $5 million — or $25 million – needed to fund production.

The poor performance of art-house movies in theaters has made this job much, much harder.

Major studios are less interested in art-house movies because they are cutting costs and focused on franchises. Smaller distributors won’t spend as much money upfront when they don’t expect to make as much in theaters. And while foreign-film financiers are happy to invest in a commercial concept like the Rebel Wilson comedy Bride Hard – think Bridesmaids meets Die Hard – they are less willing to take a chance on a title with no stars or a more esoteric plot.

The big question looming over festivals like Cannes and Sundance is whether this market will ever come back. Or, more optimistically, in what form.

Ticket sales for these movies have been declining for years, and the pandemic accelerated that trend. The audience tends to be older and wealthier, a demographic that’s been less willing to return to crowded theaters.

“When the pandemic came and people stopped going to theaters, distributors went into a medically induced coma,” John Sloss, who runs the management and sales outfit Cinetic Media, told me after the Sundance Film Festival.

While optimists believe this audience will return in time, there is a chance that most people would rather just watch these kinds of movies at home. Theaters are for spectacle.

Producers coped with the shift to home viewing by selling their wares to streaming services. Netflix, Amazon and Hulu were at first happy to spend money on challenging films that contended for awards.

Netflix spent about $40 million in one year at Sundance, which was topped by Amazon’s $56 million two years later. (Not to be outdone, Hulu took part in a $22 million deal for Palm Springs in 2020 and Apple dropped $25 million on CODA in 2021.)

Streaming services bought festival movies because they needed product and they wanted awards to validate them in the eyes of talent and viewers. “It was a feeding frenzy,” Brian Beckmann, chief financial officer of Arclight Films, said on our panel.

But streaming services are pulling back on independent film as well.

Netflix and Amazon are focused on a mass audience that prefers action to intimate drama. They still buy titles at festivals — at Cannes Netflix bought the US rights to a new movie from Carol director Todd Haynes – but not like they once did. Netflix is cutting back on its movie slate and just scrapped the division focused on movies with budgets under $30 million.

Hulu and Showtime, which had been reliable sources of cash for independent producers and studios, are far less reliable. Showtime is being absorbed into Paramount+, while Hulu is caught up in Disney’s aggressive cost cutting.

One thing to watch: Showtime has the rights to show A24 movies after they leave theaters. That deal is expiring soon, and it’s not staying at Showtime. Who is going to step up to take the rights?

A24 is coming off a great year that includes its highest-grossing movie ever and the Oscar for best picture (Everything Everywhere All At Once). It’s a ray of sunshine in an another otherwise gloomy sky.

Want the inside scoop on Apple? Make sure you're signed up for Mark Gurman’s Power On newsletter for the latest on Apple’s Worldwide Developers Conference. Bloomberg.com subscribers will receive an exclusive extra edition wrapping up everything you need to know.

The best of Screentime (and other stuff)

Little Mermaid, the rare blockbuster to bomb abroad

As Disney executives received numbers for The Little Mermaid over its opening weekend, one in particular jumped out – and not in a good way. The picture grossed less than $70 million abroad.

The film took in $95.6 million over the three-day weekend in the US and almost $120 million including the Memorial Day holiday. That put it ahead of Aladdin, which went on to collect more than $1 billion worldwide. But Aladdin brought in almost $700 million overseas. The Little Mermaid is expected to generate half that much (at best).

While there are several potential explanations, one is hard to ignore. Like other projects involving female protagonists or Black stars, The Little Mermaid has been subject to review bombing, a practice whereby critics flood sites like IMDb with negative ratings. IMDb posted a note on its website warning of suspicious voting activity.

This happened with Captain Marvel and Black Panther as well. Those movies, however, did just fine commercially. Perhaps sensing a need to capture the narrative, Disney movie executive Sean Bailey participated in a New York Times profile about the growing politicization of Disney.

The rise of Mexican music

Peso Pluma. The 23-year-old from Guadalajara is the most popular artist on both Spotify and YouTube right now. He’s leading a global wave of Mexican music, which Ashley Carman wrote about this week.

The No. 1 movie in the world is...

Spider-Man: Across the Spider-Verse grossed $120 million domestically this weekend and added another $88 million abroad. It’s going to pass the previous animated spidey movie with ease.

Shannon and Skip break up

Shannon Sharpe, co-host of Fox Sports’ popular morning TV show, is negotiating his exit from the network. Sharpe joined Fox Sports 1 in 2016 and has served as Skip Bayless’ co-host of the show Undisputed. But Sharpe and Bayless have clashed of late and Sharpe is expected to depart this summer.

Deals, deals, deals

South Korea’s largest music company is looking to raise $380 million to fund acquisitions in the US.

Netflix shareholders voted to reject top executives’ pay packages. (The board doesn’t need to listen.)

Disney is taking a $1.5 billion writedown on shows it’s removing from its streaming service.

Amazon might offer free wireless service to Prime customers.

A regional sports network in San Diego stopped paying for local rights to broadcast the Padres baseball games.

Weekly playlist

The song of my trip was Jazzy’s “Giving Me.” Also, don’t listen to all the Ted Lasso haters. The final season was great.

More from Bloomberg

Get Tech Daily and more Bloomberg Tech newsletters in your inbox: