This is Washington Edition, the newsletter about money, power and politics in the nation’s capital. Today, Supreme Court correspondent Greg Stohr outlines two cases that will put the high court in the middle of the 2024 campaign . Sign up here and follow us at @bpolitics. Email our editors here.

Consequential Decisions

In a flash today, the US Supreme Court put itself in the middle of two controversies likely to have big consequences for the 2024 election: abortion and the prosecution of Donald Trump.

The justices said they’ll hear the Biden administration’s appeal of a ruling that would limit access to mifepristone, the pill used in more than half of US abortions. The action on abortion was widely expected.

An appeals court said the Food and Drug Administration gave short shrift to safety when it expanded access to the drug starting in 2016. The high court said April the drug will remain fully available until the litigation is resolved.

Expand Photographer: MANDEL NGAN/AFP

The decision will determine whether patients can continue to get the drug by mail or instead will have to make three in-person office visits. The court limited the stakes somewhat by rejecting a separate appeal that sought to take mifepristone off the market completely.

Still, it will be the court’s first abortion case since the justices overturned Roe v. Wade and let states ban abortion last year. That ruling has already helped Democrats at the polls. The court is likely to decide the newest case in late June, in the heat of the presidential campaign.

The court also agreed to hear its first case over the Jan. 6 Capitol riot, which could affect the prosecution of Trump for trying to overturn his 2020 election loss. At issue is whether rioters can be charged with obstructing an official proceeding under a 2002 law that grew out of the Enron Corp. collapse. A Jan. 6 defendant contends the law was designed to cover things like document shredding, not attempts to disrupt Congress.

Prosecutors have invoked the provision in more than 300 Jan. 6 cases, as well as the Trump indictment. Supreme Court involvement will give the former president a new argument for delaying the scheduled March 4 start date for his trial and ultimately could lead to the dismissal of two of the four counts against him.

Don’t Miss

The Federal Reserve held interest rates steady for a third meeting and gave its clearest signal yet that its aggressive hiking campaign is finished by forecasting a series of cuts next year.

Biden has offered changes to US border policy that raises the prospects of a bipartisan deal on immigration and aid to Ukraine, according to some Republican senators.

Hedge funds and brokerages have new requirements from the SEC to centrally clear far more of their US Treasuries trades in a major structural overhaul for the $26 trillion market.

Hunter Biden challenged House Republicans to let him testify in public, admitting to “mistakes” in his business dealings while saying his father, the president, had no role in them.

Expand Hunter Biden outside the Capitol today. Photographer: Drew Angerer/Getty Images North America

US climate envoy John Kerry said countries will be judged by how well they live up to their joint commitment at the end of COP28 talks to transition away from fossil fuels.

Major companies in technology, finance and consulting — top destinations for ambitious college grads— have been cutting costs and consolidating workforces, trimming prospects for the class of 2024.

The company that owns hockey’s Washington Capitals and basketball’s Washington Wizards, and Virginia Governor Glenn Youngkin announced plans that would move the teams Bloomberg Terminal to northern Virginia.

Watch & Listen

Today on Bloomberg Television's Balance of Power at 5 p.m., hosts Joe Mathieu and Kailey Leinz interview Jared Bernstein, chair of the White House Council of Economic Advisers, about the Fed meeting and Biden’s economic message. On yesterday’s program, Melinda Haring, Atlantic Council Eurasia Center senior fellow, discussed the situation on the ground in Ukraine.

On the Big Take podcast, Bloomberg's Joshua Green and Nancy Cook examine how voters and donors are feeling dissatisfied with a second faceoff between Biden and Trump in the 2024 presidential race. Listen on iHeart, Apple Podcasts and Spotify.

Chart of the Day

Mortgage refinances as a share of total loan application volume jumped to 39.2% last week from 30.6% in late November. People typically refinance a mortgage to lower their payment or to pull equity from the home so they can use the cash for another purpose. The sharp rise in recent weeks shows that consumers are eager to bolster their bank accounts. Mortgage rates have dropped in recent weeks but the average 30-year fixed mortgage rate is still more than twice as high as the 2020-2021 average. Refinance activity was particularly notable for FHA and VA loans, according to the Mortgage Bankers Association. — Alex Tanzi

What’s Next

Retail sales for November are reported by the Census Bureau at 8:30 a.m. tomorrow.

The US House is scheduled to leave for its holiday break tomorrow. The Senate’s Friday departure remains in flux.

The Census Bureau reports November’s housing starts at 8:30 a.m. on Tuesday.

New Home sales data will be released by the Census Bureau at 10 a.m. next Friday.

CNN plans to host Republican presidential primary debates in Iowa on Jan. 10 and New Hampshire on Jan. 21. ABC has scheduled one for Jan. 18, also in New Hampshire.

Seen Elsewhere

A small circle of meme-makers has emerged as a shadow ad agency for Trump’s presidential campaign, flooding social media with content promoting the former president, the New York Times reports.

American entrepreneur John Textor committed over $1 billion to carving out a corner of professional soccer and has gotten a crash course in the pitfalls of team ownership, according to the Wall Street Journal.

The US is leading an initiative at the United Nations to mobilize all governments to support what Ambassador Linda Thomas-Greenfield calls “ AI for good and for all,” Axios reports.

More From Bloomberg

And sign up for more Bloomberg newsletters at Bloomberg.com.