Now that terror and tragedy have struck the greatest community benefit of having an NFL team — the championship parade — it’s time for the league to use its considerable influence to fight against the proliferation of guns in America.

Kansas City’s celebration of the Chiefs’ third Super Bowl victory in five years came to an abrupt end on Wednesday when gunfire broke out, killing one person and wounding 21 others. Now the NFL and its fans have to ask whether maintaining the status quo is worth the risk, whether the frivolity of parades and their awkward owner dances or tossing the Lombardi trophy from boat to boat can continue in a country that has witnessed more mass shootings than days so far in 2024.

Would you want to bring your kids to a parade after at least nine children were shot at the Chiefs’ celebration on Wednesday?

We have seen the NFL throw its weight behind important causes, such as breast cancer awareness and research, and it’s pledged more than $265 million to the Players Coalition that was formed to fight for racial and social equality. Now, for the sake of the safety of its fans, it needs to advocate for stronger gun control laws.

You’d think the league would want to avoid taking sides on an issue that divided the nation since the ratification of the Bill of Rights, but the NFL has already declared its stance. It is anti-gun, at least on its own turf.

It would be impossible to draw any other conclusion, when on Super Bowl Sunday the security perimeter extended beyond the Allegiant Stadium grounds and into the nearby business district, which meant that despite Nevada’s license-less open-carry laws, civilians were not allowed to have guns on those public streets that day.

It wasn’t the least bit controversial. There weren’t Second Amendment advocates protesting outside the fences.

Yet as powerful and popular as the NFL is – and with a record 123.7 million television viewers for the Super Bowl the popularity might be at an all-time high – it does not have the ability to exercise control over city streets across the land. What it can do is lobby for gun-control laws and fund gun-control initiatives.

The NFL could take the same approach to guns that the Players Coalition it funds has taken to racial justice and police reform, which is to seek legislative changes at local levels. Among the achievements the coalition claims are helping to pass a Kentucky state law that partially bans no-knock search warrants, such as the kind that ended in the police shooting of Breonna Taylor, and advocating for a Florida amendment that restored voting rights for 1.4 million citizens with past criminal convictions.

Over the past few years, the NFL has painted “End Racism” on the edges of the end zone on the fields. A nice gesture, albeit short on an explanation of how to do so. Next season the mission should read “End Gun Violence.” It’s more tangible, because the problem is physical, not a mentality.

To do nothing, is to accept the possibility that any future championship celebration will carry the same possibility of gun violence. Surely the NFL doesn’t want its brand associated with this mayhem.

Though, in some ways, the blend of America’s No. 1 sport with America’s ongoing plague is unavoidable.



During the buildup to the Super Bowl, thousands of fans in Las Vegas poured through the Mandalay Bay Resort and Casino each day, walking in the same building where a gunman fired more than 1,100 rounds at a country music festival in 2017. Fifty-eight people died and more than 850 people were injured in the worst mass shooting event in United States history.

And mass shootings have befallen NFL territories from coast to coast, including the high school shooting in Parkland, Florida, exactly six years prior to the Kansas City parade. While the local NFL teams typically respond with statements of sympathy and even acts of generosity (the Chicago Bears bought a special wheelchair for a boy who was partially paralyzed in a Fourth of July parade shooting), they rarely advocate for addressing the root of the problem. Philadelphia Eagles owner Jeffrey Lurie was a notable exception among several franchises that participated in National Gun Violence Awareness Day in 2022 when he wrote: “As a country, we need to call upon our lawmakers to enact tangible change and address this public crisis through appropriate gun safety legislation.”

What is needed during this moment is much more: A unified, collective response from the nation’s most watched league.



In a tweet, Chiefs defensive lineman Charles Omenihu posed some of the same questions most of us have asked ourselves after tragedies such as Sandy Hook, Parkland, Uvalde, the Buffalo grocery store shooting and the Highland Park parade shooting: “… When are we going to fix these gun laws? How many more people have to die to say enough is enough? It’s too easy for the wrong people to obtain guns in America and that’s a FACT.”

Maybe this tragic ending to the Chiefs’ triumphant season will be the tipping point. Now would be a good time for the league that just played its Super Bowl in a stadium built with $750 million in public funds to demand that type of political commitment to saving lives.



More From Bloomberg Opinion:

LeBron James Played the NBA Tournament as If It Mattered: J.A. Adande

American Cricket’s (World) Cup Runneth Over: Bobby Ghosh

College Sports Need Their Tax-Exempt Status Revoked: Adam Minter

Want more Bloomberg Opinion? Terminal readers head to OPIN <GO> . Or subscribe to our daily newsletter.