This is Washington Edition, the newsletter about money, power and politics in the nation’s capital. Today, congressional correspondent Steven T. Dennis looks at the Republican disarray in Congress. Sign up here and follow us at @bpolitics. Email our editors here.

A Bad Look

Even in the often messy history of Congress in action, the chaos engulfing Republicans in the Capitol stands out.

The two GOP leaders, Mitch McConnell in the Senate and House Speaker Mike Johnson, are under siege from a rebellion within Republican ranks, largely stoked by the party’s leading presidential candidate, Donald Trump.

Johnson suffered two humiliating losses on high profile votes yesterday -- on impeaching Homeland Security Secretary Alejandro Mayorkas and on a standalone package of military aid for Israel. It’s not out of the question that Republicans could once again oust their leader.

McConnell, who is in the twilight of a long career as Senate GOP leader, watched today as a deal he had nurtured for months – pairing border security with aid for Ukraine, Israel and Taiwan – imploded as Republicans blocked it.

Expand McConnell Photographer: Al Drago/Bloomberg

As Bloomberg colleagues Erik Wasson and Ellen M. Gilmer report, that leaves little chance of immigration legislation passing before the November elections for president and Congress (and probably much longer than that) and a less than clear path for the emergency security assistance.

Infighting and failure are bad looks, especially in an election year.

The immigration debate, now a top issue for voters, will be prominent in the campaign between President Joe Biden and Trump, who is all but assured of winning the GOP presidential nomination.

But there’s another equally close contest taking place for control of Congress. Republicans want to hold on to or expand their slim majority in the House, and they had been looking at overturning the Democrats’ narrow margin of control in the Senate.

Voters have made pretty clear in polls and recent elections that they have a low opinion of Congress, and disarray and inaction won’t help that. The biggest question on the November ballot may be who to blame.

Don’t Miss

US debt held by the public is expected to hit an all-time high in the next 10 years, as costs for mandatory programs and net interest payments grow, according to the Congressional Budget Office.

The US goods-trade deficit with China shrank to the smallest total since 2010 last year, reflecting a decline in imports from a strategic rival that will be welcomed in Washington.

Trump would target the European Union for a potential slew of punitive trade measures designed to address long-standing grievances should he retake office.

Saudi Arabia has threatened to imprison the bankers and consultants it works with if they cooperate with a probe by US lawmakers into the planned merger of the PGA Tour with LIV Golf.

The wealth of Americans under 40 grew at a much higher pace than that of older generations since the pandemic, thanks in part to the boom in stocks, but they still hold only a fraction of total US wealth.

The Biden administration intends to unveil as soon as next week a new effort to prevent foreign adversaries such as China from accessing troves of Americans’ sensitive personal data.

Top administration officials plan to meet Arab and Muslim community leaders in Michigan, a critical battleground state, amid tension over Biden’s Israel policy.

Watch & Listen

Today on Bloomberg Television's new Balance of Power early edition at 1 p.m., hosts Joe Mathieu and Kailey Leinz interviewed former Republican Representative Denver Riggleman about the dysfunction enveloping the party in Congress.

On the program at 5 p.m., they talk with Senators Michael Bennet, a Democrat, and Bill Hagerty, a Republican, about aid for Ukraine, Israel and Taiwan along with the other issues in the chamber.

On the Big Take podcast, Bloomberg's senior global business reporter K. Oanh Ha unravels the mystery of how Russian fuel flows through Libya to dodge European sanctions. Listen on iHeart, Apple Podcasts and Spotify.

Chart of the Day

The total value of US petroleum exports surged in December to a record $17.3 billion. During all of 2023, shipments totaled $175 billion, an 8% increase from the prior year. The US had been running a deficit in the petroleum import-export balance up until 2020 when it changed to a surplus — $16.6 billion — for the first time, data going back to 2002 show. Last year, the overall total trade balance for petroleum rose to $18.3 billion, a record. — Alex Tanzi

What’s Next

Treasury Secretary Janet Yellen testifies tomorrow before the Senate Banking Committee.

The US Supreme Court is scheduled to hear arguments on Trump's eligibility to run for president again at 10 a.m. tomorrow.

Republican caucuses in Nevada and the US Virgin Islands will be held tomorrow.

The consumer price index for January is released at 8:30 a.m. on Tuesday by the Bureau of Labor Statistics.

Initial and continuing claims for unemployment benefits will be released at 8:30 a.m. Feb. 15.

The Senate takes a two-week break beginning Feb. 12 and the House is out for two weeks starting Feb. 19.

The South Carolina Republican primary is Feb. 24.

The Michigan presidential primary is Feb. 27.

The Super Tuesday round of 15 state primaries is March 5.

Seen Elsewhere

About 653,000 people in the US were homeless last month, a 12% jump from a year earlier and the highest count ever reported, according to the Associated Press.

A beachfront compound in Naples, Florida, is on the market for $295 million, and it would be the most expensive residential sale in the US if the sellers get close to the asking price, the Wall Street Journal reports.

More From Bloomberg

And sign up for more Bloomberg newsletters at Bloomberg.com.