Hi, it’s Bob in New York. The number of public hearings that provide a glimpse into the opaque drug approval process are on the decline. But first...

Today's must-reads

The world is at risk of losing the battle to end hunger.

Google’s AI for medicine shows clinical answers that are more than 90% accurate.

Republican efforts to restrict voting are hurting the party’s appeal to people with disabilities.

FDA holds fewer public drug reviews

Researchers were startled to find that the Food and Drug Administration convened just 18 public drug advisory panel hearings in 2021, down from a high of 50 in 2012, according to a study from Harvard Medical School and Brigham and Women's Hospital recently published in JAMA Health Forum this month.

The decline was even more dramatic for hearings evaluating initial approval of new drugs: In 2020 and 2021, only eight new drugs got a public hearing, compared to 26 in 2012.

Researchers analyzed 409 prescription drug advisory hearings between 2010 and 2021.

Much of the US drug approval process is conducted in private. The FDA generally doesn’t openly discuss details of drug applications under its review — except with the drug’s parent company — although it does release information on the review after drugs hit the market.

The exceptions are roughly daylong advisory panel meetings where the agency brings in independent experts to hear the data behind a proposed new drug. Typically, the advisers give an up or down vote at the end of the day to determine whether the drug should be approved.

While the agency isn’t required to follow the panels’ advice, the hearings are a valuable resource that helps the agency “build and maintain public trust,” researchers wrote.

“It was surprising to us to see it go down so far,” says Aaron Kesselheim, a professor at Harvard Medical School and the study’s senior author.

The reasons aren’t clear, as drug approvals haven’t declined. And the downswing started before the pandemic, during which the transition to virtual hearings made the process easier, Kesselheim says.

The analysis also found that when an advisory panel votes in favor of a drug, it’s almost always later approved. But when panels voted against the initial approval of a drug, the agency still eventually allowed the drug on the market a third of the time.

The FDA calls advisory panels “a valuable tool,” especially for challenging or complex drug cases. “The standards for approval, and how they are applied in our regulatory decision-making, have not changed,” it says.



As a reporter, I’ve covered numerous advisory panels, from obesity drugs to cancer pills to Alzheimer’s antibodies. While messy, they provide crucial insight into the agency’s thinking on particular drugs and the data backing an application, both for and against. That’s particularly important for controversial new drugs where approval or non-approval is a close call, as is often the case.

“Independent experts have supported the FDA’s credibility and improved the transparency of its decision-making for half a century," says Joseph Daval, a postdoctoral researcher at Harvard Medical School and lead study author.

“So when advisers are consulted less frequently, those benefits may be getting lost at a time when the FDA is facing increased scrutiny from experts and declining trust from the public.” — Robert Langreth

The big story

In the face of a shortage of 80,000 workers, the US public health system needs to step it up in the fight for talent, says former Centers for Disease Control and Prevention Director Rochelle Walensky. In our latest Five Minutes With column, Walensky outlines ways state, local and federal health departments can compete for talent with hazard pay, debt relief and work-from-home flexibilities.

What we’re reading

Racially biased doctor notes may influence care, according to this report from Undark.

Brain implants may treat suicidal depression. This ScienceNews series explores the potential for deep brain stimulation.

Mineral sunscreen makers are increasingly using a concerning chemical to reduce pastiness, Bloomberg’s Anna Edney reports.



Ask Prognosis

Ask us anything — well, anything health-related that is! Each week we’re picking a reader question and putting it to our network of experts. So get in touch via AskPrognosis@bloomberg.net.