This transcript was created using speech recognition software. While it has been reviewed by human transcribers, it may contain errors. Please review the episode audio before quoting from this transcript and email transcripts@nytimes.com with any questions.

My name is Charles Blow. I’m an op-ed columnist at The New York Times. I write about politics, culture, and inequality. And I believe that if Black people simply returned to the South, they could significantly increase their own political power, which has the potential to not only upend the politics of that region, but also of the country as a whole.

There is no way to truly have power in the country if you do not also have access to state power. And there is right now no state in the country where Black people are a majority, and not one where they are projected to be a majority. And that powerlessness is something that I detest. [MUSIC ENDS]

At the end of the Civil War, three Southern states were majority Black. Another three were very close to being majority Black. And it had a tremendous impact on the politics of the region and of the country. But millions of Black people during the Great Migration migrate largely from the rural South to primarily cities in the North and West. [MUSIC PLAYING]

There were a lot of amazing things that came out of the Great Migration. But there were some negatives as well — the rise of racialized, chronic ghettos in urban areas, intense concentrated poverty, militarized policing. And over time, many Black people just became disenchanted with these cities. And now it continues to show up in demographic data that Black people are leaving Northern and Western cities for the South.

The case I make for reverse migration, because it’s already happening, is to apply to it or infuse it with a kind of political framing to give it a definition, to give it shape, because right now, it is without that. It’s devoid of that. The Great Migration had it. There were champions of the Great Migration. Black newspapers in the North actively recruited Black people to move North. There is no parallel phenomenon now. And I am hoping to fill that void.