Miriam Jordan I’m a national immigration correspondent for The New York Times, reporting on the complexities and paradoxes of immigration policies and their impact on immigrants as well as American society, demographics and the economy.

What I Cover

I cover lawful and unlawful immigration. This means that I report on people who arrive in the United States with visas to work, study and find refuge, as well as those who cross the border without authorization, many of them fleeing extreme weather or violence or seeking a chance to work and escape economic hardships in their homelands.

My coverage takes me frequently to the U.S.-Mexico border. It also takes me across the country, to places like Northwest Arkansas, where Indian computer programmers develop software for Walmart; the fields of California, Florida and Georgia, where undocumented farmworkers toil; and Louisville, Ky., home to the country’s fastest-growing Cuban community. I rode a Greyhound bus from Arizona to Tennessee to report on the mass movement of migrant families.

Among my areas of interest are the changing composition of the migrant population, the broken asylum system, refugee resettlement and DACA, the program that offers deportation protection and work permits to hundreds of thousands of undocumented young adults.

My Background

Before joining The Times in 2017, I worked at Reuters and The Wall Street Journal, where I was a Gerald Loeb Award finalist for my work on stories about “the moral, legal and economic dilemmas of illegal immigration.” I have been a correspondent in the Middle East, Asia and Latin America, focusing on poverty, public health and gender issues.

I earned an undergraduate degree from Stanford University and a graduate degree in journalism from Columbia University. I speak Portuguese, Spanish, French and Hebrew. I was born in Brooklyn and spent my first nine years in different parts of the country, including Ames, Iowa; Houston; and New Orleans. I later lived in São Paulo and Rio de Janeiro, where I finished high school.

Journalistic Ethics

I strive to understand issues deeply, and to report impartially. I do not participate in politics, nor do I make political donations. You can learn more about The Times’s ethics policy here.

Please feel free to contact me with tips and story ideas.