“In the college admissions process, I feel like I had essentially every privilege possible.” “I was thinking, well, Harvard is my top choice. It’s not guaranteed that I’m going to get in, but this little bump — because my father went there — will put me over the edge.” “It’s painful for me to think that all of my hard work in high school was so irrelevant compared to the fact that I was able to check the box that my dad went there.” “Legacy admissions is affirmative action for the rich. Objectively, it’s affirmative action for rich.” “It never really was a decision to apply to Harvard. It was like, well, of course that’s where I would go. Of course that’s where I want to be. Once you get in, they tell you —” “You belong here.” “You belong here.” “You belong at Harvard.” “Harvard admissions council — they do not make mistakes.” “We did not make a single mistake.” “Every single one of you has earned your spot to be at Yale.” “Penn chose you.” “Because you are the smartest, because you’re the brightest.” “You were selected from almost 45,000 applicants.” “You are the best, I guess, that America has to offer.” “And that’s not really the case.” “I applied to 15 schools and got into two or three of them. It’s pretty telling that one of those places that I got into was the place that gave me an explicit leg up.” “I think for a long time I really grappled with guilt and self-esteem issues related to me attending Brown, because there was always going to be that voice in my head that was telling me: ‘It’s because you’re a legacy student, it’s because you’re a legacy student.’” “I didn’t want to be reduced to just, ‘He’s a legacy admit.’ It’s like telling the world: ‘I don’t deserve to be here, I’m a fraud.’” “I think there is a pretty natural human shame in admitting that you might not have earned something.” “From birth, I’ve been given so many advantages. Both my parents are educated. They’re doctors who went to Ivy League institutions.” “I come from an affluent family that was able to send me to private school.” “Before I got to campus, I was [LAUGHS] filled with this tremendous sense of sadness. If not for these incredible strokes of luck that befell me, where would I be?” “Legacy students are overwhelmingly wealthy, and they are overwhelmingly privileged in many ways that already give them a huge leg up in the college admissions process.” “I wouldn’t have a problem if it weren’t so hypocritical.” “You have just arrived at a place that values difference.” “We do not want everyone to be cut from the same cloth.” “They say all of these things, like, the things that we care most about are having a diverse campus.” “The thriving, diverse intellectual community is essential to academic excellence and critical to shaping the next generation of leaders.” “To create future generations of successful people in America — but I actually lived with my dad’s college roommate’s son.” “There’s people who I would run into on campus, and I would say, that last name sounds really familiar. I think that my dad knew your dad, and they played lacrosse together.” “A school like Harvard is a small world. Things like legacy admissions help those environments be more insular and more secluded from people who haven’t been a part of them.” “These practices of maintaining admissions within a bloodline or within a family were literally the way that white Protestant college graduates hoped to exclude Jewish applicants.” “If you hear someone talking about limiting who can live in a neighborhood or have a certain job, it is discriminatory. For some reason, in legacy admissions, we hold that up to be virtuous.” “It’s so easy to say now, oh, I wouldn’t have checked that box.” “Because I can’t go back in time, I think now all I can do is speak up about legacy admissions.” “I have a responsibility to call out the hypocrisy of legacy admissions more than anyone else because I benefited from it.” “I cannot say clearly and with enough emphasis to my alma mater, please get rid of the considerations of legacy status and admissions.” “Ending legacy admissions just feels like a layup for equality.” “I would love for my kids to go to Brown. But more than that, I’d want my kids to see me speaking up against something that I feel is wrong.” “It’s as easy as removing the checkbox.” “Get rid of it.” “Legacy admissions has to go.”