1990 Younger populations Working

age Older populations For decades, the world’s dominant powers have benefited from large working-age populations that help drive economic growth. Meanwhile, particularly young populations in much of the developing world mean limited resources are diverted to raising children, curbing economic opportunity. But the world’s demographic sweet spots are changing, and fast. Japan had the first major shift: By 2013, a quarter of the population was 65 and older, making Japan the oldest large country ever. Soon, much of Western Europe will follow, with record old-age populations. South Korea, Britain and Eastern Europe will be next, along with China. At the same time, many low-income countries today will have huge prime-age labor forces for the first time. Can they take advantage of the opportunity? Source: U.N. World Population Prospects 2022 Young populations are those in which at least a quarter of the population is under age 15. In old populations, at least a quarter of the population is 65 or older.

The world’s demographics have already been transformed. Europe is shrinking. China is shrinking, with India, a much younger country, overtaking it this year as the world’s most populous nation.

But what we’ve seen so far is just the beginning.

The projections are reliable, and stark: By 2050, people age 65 and older will make up nearly 40 percent of the population in some parts of East Asia and Europe. That’s almost twice the share of older adults in Florida, America’s retirement capital. Extraordinary numbers of retirees will be dependent on a shrinking number of working-age people to support them.

In all of recorded history, no country has ever been as old as these nations are expected to get.

As a result, experts predict, things many wealthier countries take for granted — like pensions, retirement ages and strict immigration policies — will need overhauls to be sustainable. And today’s wealthier countries will almost inevitably make up a smaller share of global G.D.P., economists say.

This is a sea change for Europe, the United States, China and other top economies, which have had some of the most working-age people in the world, adjusted for their populations. Their large work forces have helped to drive their economic growth.

Those countries are already aging off the list. Soon, the best-balanced work forces will mostly be in South and Southeast Asia, Africa and the Middle East, according to U.N. projections. The shift could reshape economic growth and geopolitical power balances, experts say.

Largest working-age share of population Top 10 largest economies today 1990 Japan South Korea Germany Italy Russia United States France China Thailand United Kingdom 2023 South Korea Brazil Colombia China Thailand Iran Myanmar Vietnam Bangladesh Indonesia 2050 South Africa Myanmar India Bangladesh Philippines Pakistan Kenya Indonesia Egypt Ethiopia Sources: U.N. World Population Prospects, World Bank Graphic includes countries with at least 50 million people in 2023. Largest economies are determined by gross domestic product.

In many respects, the aging of the world is a triumph of development. People are living longer, healthier lives and having fewer children as they get richer.

The opportunity for many poorer countries is enormous. When birth rates fall, countries can reap a “demographic dividend,” when a growing share of workers and few dependents fuel economic growth. Adults with smaller families have more free time for education and investing in their children. More women tend to enter the work force, compounding the economic boost.

Demography isn’t destiny, and the dividend isn’t automatic. Without jobs, having a lot of working-age people can drive instability rather than growth. And even as they age, rich countries will enjoy economic advantages and a high standard of living for a long time.

1990 2023 2050 The world’s dominant powers had large working-age populations in the 1990s. Others were still very young. Today, much of Europe is aging, and Japan is particularly old. In 2050, most of today’s richest countries will be old. Others will have huge working-age populations for the first time. Russia U.K. France Pakistan Pakistan China China U.S. U.S. Japan U.S. Japan China India India India Nigeria Nigeria Ethiopia D.R.C. Indonesia Indonesia Brazil Brazil Brazil 1990 The world’s dominant powers had large working-age populations in the 1990s. Others were still very young. Russia U.K. U.S. China Japan India Brazil 2023 Today, much of Europe is aging, and Japan is particularly old. Pakistan France China U.S. Japan India Nigeria Brazil Indonesia 2050 In 2050, most of today’s richest countries will be old. Others will have huge working-age populations for the first time. Pakistan U.S. China India Nigeria D.R.C. Ethiopia Brazil Indonesia 1990 2023 2050 The world’s dominant powers had large working-age populations in the 1990s. Others were still very young. Today, much of Europe is aging, and Japan is particularly old. In 2050, most of today’s richest countries will be old. Others will have huge working-age populations for the first time. Russia U.K. France Pakistan Pakistan China China U.S. U.S. U.S. Japan Japan China India India India Nigeria Nigeria Ethiopia D.R.C. Indonesia Indonesia Brazil Brazil Brazil 1990 2023 2050 The world’s dominant powers had large working-age populations in the 1990s. Others were still very young. Today, much of Europe is aging, and Japan is particularly old. In 2050, most of today’s richest countries will be old. Others will have huge working-age populations for the first time. Russia U.K. France Pakistan China U.S. U.S. U.S. Japan China Japan China India India India Nigeria Nigeria Ethiopia D.R.C. Indonesia Indonesia Brazil Brazil Brazil 1990 2023 2050 The world’s dominant powers had large working-age populations in the 1990s. Others were still very young. Today, much of Europe is aging, and Japan is particularly old. In 2050, most of today’s richest countries will be old. Others will have huge working-age populations for the first time. Russia U.K. France Pakistan China U.S. U.S. U.S. Japan Japan China China India India India Nigeria Nigeria Ethiopia D.R.C. Indonesia Indonesia Brazil Brazil Brazil

But the economic logic of age is hard to escape.

“All of these changes should never surprise anyone. But they do,” said Mikko Myrskylä, director of the Max Planck Institute for Demographic Research. “And that’s not because we didn't know. It’s because politically it’s so difficult to react.”

The Opportunity of Youth

50 youngest countries in 2050 2023 10 children for every 10 working-age adults 9 8 Niger 7 Dem. Rep. of Congo Somalia 6 Central African Rep. Angola Tanzania Nigeria 5 Afghanistan Ethiopia Tajikistan Kenya 4 Countries with a very high proportion of children today will have fewer child dependents and more workers in 2050. Many are in Africa, Asia or Oceania. 3 2 1 0 children for every 10 working-age adults 1990 2050 2023 10 children for every 10 working-age adults 9 8 Niger 7 Dem. Rep. of Congo Somalia 6 Central African Rep. Angola Tanzania Nigeria 5 Afghanistan Ethiopia Tajikistan Kenya 4 Countries with a very high proportion of children today will have fewer child dependents and more workers in 2050. Many are in Africa, Asia or Oceania. 3 2 1 0 children for every 10 working-age adults 1990 2050 Source: Times analysis of U.N. World Population Prospects

As in many young countries, birth rates in Kenya have declined drastically in recent years. Women had an average of eight children 50 years ago, but only just over three last year. Demographically, Kenya looks something like South Korea in the mid-1970s, as its economy was beginning a historic rise, although its birth rate is declining somewhat more slowly. Much of South Asia and Africa have similar age structures.

The upside is enormous.

A similar jump in the working-age population may explain about a third of the economic growth through the end of the last century in South Korea, China, Japan and Singapore, according to the best estimates — an enormous amount of economic growth.

Young populations Working

age Old populations 1990 Oldest regions Europe 0 20 40 60 80+ Ages: Albania Particularly young Austria Belarus Belgium Bosnia and Herzegovina Bulgaria Croatia Czech Rep. Denmark Estonia Finland France Germany Greece Hungary Ireland Italy Kosovo Latvia Lithuania Netherlands N. Macedonia Norway Poland Portugal Moldova Romania Russia Serbia Slovakia Slovenia Spain Sweden Switzerland Ukraine U.K. Eastern Asia 0 20 40 60 80+ Ages: China Large working-age population Hong Kong North Korea Japan Mongolia South Korea Taiwan Northern America 0 20 40 60 80+ Ages: Canada Large working-age population United States Australia and New Zealand 0 20 40 60 80+ Ages: Australia Large working-age population New Zealand Youngest region Sub-Saharan Africa 0 20 40 60 80+ Ages: Angola Particularly young Benin Botswana Burkina Faso Burundi Cameroon Central African Rep. Chad Comoros Rep. of Congo Ivory Coast Dem. Rep. of Congo Djibouti Eq. Guinea Eritrea Eswatini Ethiopia Gabon Gambia Ghana Guinea Guinea-Bissau Kenya Lesotho Liberia Madagascar Malawi Mali Mauritania Mauritius Mozambique Namibia Niger Nigeria Rwanda Senegal Sierra Leone Somalia South Africa South Sudan Togo Uganda Tanzania Zambia Zimbabwe Countries shown are those projected to have a population of 1 million or more by 2050, according to U.N. projections. Ages are shown as five-year averages. Regions are based on U.N. classifications.

Many of these demographic changes are already baked in: Most people who will be alive in 2050 have already been born.

But predictions always involve uncertainty, and there is evidence that sub-Saharan African countries’ fertility rates are dropping even faster than the U.N. projects — meaning that those African countries could be even better positioned in 2050 than currently expected.

But without the right policies, a huge working-age population can backfire rather than lead to economic growth. If large numbers of young adults don’t have access to jobs or education, widespread youth unemployment can even threaten stability as frustrated young people turn to criminal or armed groups for better opportunities.

“If you don’t have employment for those people who are entering the labor force, then it’s no guarantee that the demographic dividend is going to happen,” said Carolina Cardona, a health economist at Johns Hopkins University who works with the Demographic Dividend Initiative.

East Asian countries that hit the demographic sweet spot in the last few decades had particularly good institutions and policies in place to take advantage of that potential, said Philip O’Keefe, who directs the Aging Asia Research Hub at the ARC Center of Excellence in Population Aging Research and previously led reports on aging in East Asia and the Pacific at the World Bank.

Other parts of the world – some of Latin America, for example – had age structures similar to those East Asian countries’ but haven’t seen anywhere near the same growth, according to Mr. O’Keefe. “Demography is the raw material,” he said. “The dividend is the interaction of the raw material and good policies.”

The Challenges of Aging

50 oldest countries in 2050 There will be three adults age 65 or older for every four working-age adults in South Korea in 2050. Most of the oldest places will be in Asia and Europe. 8 seniors for every 10 working-age adults Hong Kong For every two working-age adults in Japan, there is currently at least one person who is age 65 or older. South Korea 2023 Italy 7 Spain Taiwan Greece 6 Singapore Slovenia Thailand Germany 5 Mainland China Finland Japan Netherlands Canada 4 3 1990 2050 There will be three adults age 65 or older for every four working-age adults in South Korea in 2050. Most of the oldest places will be in Asia and Europe. 8 seniors for every 10 working-age adults Hong Kong South Korea 2023 Italy 7 Spain Taiwan Greece 6 Singapore Slovenia Japan Thailand Germany 5 Mainland China Finland Netherlands 4 Canada 3 For every two working-age adults in Japan, there is currently at least one person who is age 65 or older. 1990 2050 Source: U.N. World Population Prospects

Today’s young countries aren’t the only ones at a critical juncture. The transformation of rich countries has only just begun. If these countries fail to prepare for a shrinking number of workers, they will face a gradual decline in well-being and economic power.

The number of working-age people in South Korea and Italy, two countries that will be among the world’s oldest, is projected to decrease by 13 million and 10 million by 2050, according to U.N. population projections. China is projected to have 200 million fewer residents of working age, a decrease higher than the entire population of most countries.

Large countries with the highest share of population 65 or older by 2050 Italy South Korea Japan Spain 2023 2050 2023 2050 2023 2050 2023 2050 72m In 2050, the number of older South Korean adults will near the number of working-age adults. 53m 39m 37m 36m 37m Working age 31m 27m 24m 23m 19m 18m 16m 14m Old 14m 12m 9.9m 9.5m 7.2m Young 6.4m 5.8m 5.8m 5m 3.8m South Korea Japan 2023 2050 2023 2050 72m Working age In 2050, the number of older South Korean adults will near the number of working-age adults. 53m Old 39m 36m 37m 24m 18m Young 14m 12m 9.5m 5.8m 3.8m Italy Spain 2023 2050 2023 2050 37m 31m 27m 23m 19m 16m 14m 9.9m 7.2m 5.8m 6.4m 5m Source: U.N. World Population Prospects 2022

To cope, experts say, aging rich countries will need to rethink pensions, immigration policies and what life in old age looks like.

Change will not come easy. More than a million people have taken to the streets in France to protest raising the retirement age to 64 from 62, highlighting the difficult politics of adjusting. Immigration fears have fueled support for right-wing candidates across aging countries in the West and East Asia.

“Much of the challenges at the global level are questions of distribution,” Dr. Myrskylä said. “So some places have too many old people. Some places have too many young people. It would of course make enormous sense to open the borders much more. And at the same time we see that’s incredibly difficult with the increasing right-wing populist movements.”

The changes will be amplified in Asian countries, which are aging faster than other world regions, according to the World Bank. A change in age structure that took France more than 100 years and the United States more than 60 took many East and Southeast Asian countries just 20 years.

Not only are Asian countries aging much faster, but some are also becoming old before they become rich. While Japan, South Korea and Singapore have relatively high income levels, China reached its peak working-age population at 20 percent the income level that the United States had at the same point. Vietnam reached the same peak at 14 percent the same level.

Pension systems in lower-income countries are less equipped to handle aging populations than those in richer countries.

In most lower-income countries, workers are not protected by a robust pension system, Mr. O’Keefe said. They rarely contribute a portion of their wages toward retirement plans, as in many wealthy countries.

“That clearly is not a situation that’s going to be sustainable socially in 20 years’ time when you have much higher shares of aged population,” he said. “Countries will have to sort out what model of a pension system they need to provide some kind of adequacy of financial support in an old age.”

And some rich countries won’t face as profound a change — including the United States.

Slightly higher fertility rates and more immigration mean the United States and Australia, for example, will be younger than most other rich countries in 2050. In both the United States and Australia, just under 24 percent of the population is projected to be 65 or older in 2050, according to U.N. projections — far higher than today, but lower than in most of Europe and East Asia, which will top 30 percent.

Aging is a tremendous achievement despite its problems.

“We’ve managed to increase the length of life,” Dr. Myrskylä said. “We have reduced premature mortality. We have reached a state in which having children is a choice that people make instead of somehow being coerced, forced by societal structures into having whatever number of children.”

People aren’t just living longer; they are also living healthier, more active lives. And aging countries’ high level of development means they will continue to enjoy prosperity for a long time.

But behavioral and governmental policy choices loom large.

“You can say with some kind of degree of confidence what the demographics will look like,” Mr. O’Keefe said. “What the society will look like depends enormously on policy choices and behavioral change.”