In the late 1960s, in the neighborhood where I grew up, construction crews began work on the planned North Berkeley BART station by demolishing several city blocks. They cleared four square blocks around what would become the station itself, plus an adjacent five-block strip to build tunnels. Early proposals included replacing the demolished homes with new apartment buildings, but that never happened. The entire parcel around the station became a parking lot, and the linear five-block parcel became an urban wildland of blackberry brambles, cardboard shanties and sketchy hand-welded playground structures.

By the mid-1970s, when I was old enough to ride a BMX bike, that wildland included dirt jumps like one I can remember pedaling toward, fast and frantic through dry grass and broken glass. I must have been 9 or 10. A bunch more kids, probably smoking cigarettes and eating candy, watched as I hit that ramp and got air and tried a trick called a tabletop, which involves holding your bike down and away from your body and turning it sideways, parallel to the ground. I failed to pull the bike back into riding position, so I landed with the frame still flat like that. My little body slammed down onto the pedals and gears, and I came up crying — but psyched to go tell my father, who loved that kind of thing.

That meant rolling home with bloody scrapes full of gravel past old farmhouses cheap enough for mailmen and jazz musicians to buy, build claptrap chicken coops and grow weed in the backyard. It meant riding onto the crab grass lawn of our own two-story Victorian, which my parents bought for $27,000 in 1971, a year in which my mother didn’t work and my father’s total income, as a public-interest lawyer for the Legal Aid Society of Alameda County, was $14,000.

Across the street was a shabby stucco where Owsley Stanley, the original Grateful Dead sound man, cooked up some of the earliest recreational LSD. Another neighbor, Alice Waters, who was my preschool teacher at Berkeley Montessori, was starting a little neighborhood bistro called Chez Panisse. A kid down the street, Charlie Hunter, joined me in taking guitar lessons with a dude named Joe Satriani, who later emerged as one of the world’s finest technical guitarists — not long before Hunter himself became one of our own generation’s great jazz players.