onto vehicles. She told us that the officer who answered said Black Lives Matter was a "terrorist" organization and stated: "We are going to make sure you and all of the Black Lives supporters are wiped off the face of the Earth.” He said, “I think you should file a complaint, and I want you to do it well, so let me spell my first and my last name so you get it right. Then I'll give you my badge number." The woman asked to speak to a supervisor, but the officer refused to transfer her or take her contact information. The woman filed a complaint the next day but was not interviewed for seven months. Though she described the officer's threat to us as a “discriminatory comment, mostly against Blacks or people of color," MPD did not investigate for bias. Instead, the investigation was for failure to engage in "professional policing." The investigation concluded in February 2022 with a finding of "no merit" and no discipline or coaching. The officer had been the subject of at least nine previous complaints since 2017 (including at least one about racial profiling that was dismissed for unclear reasons). The woman told us the officer "sure felt like he was above any repercussions," and he was. He still works for MPD. That was not the only racial bias complaint that was treated as something else. As discussed later in this report, in 2020 MPD failed to investigate a Black woman's explicit complaint of discrimination and unlawful arrest after she called 911 for help for her white partner, instead investigating only potential failures to adhere to MPD's body camera policy and engage in "professional policing." See page 72. In incidents where we found MPD did hold officers accountable for biased conduct, it was often only after public outrage, and even then, MPD failed to communicate a clear message to officers, supervisors, and the public. For example, in 2015, MPD officers stopped a car carrying four Somali-American teens. According to an arbitrator assigned to review discipline, an officer approached the car with his gun drawn and ordered a teen to get out, threatening: “If you fuck with me, I'm gonna break your leg before you even get a chance to run." When the teen asked why he was being arrested, the officer replied, "Because I feel like arresting you." Later, when one of the teens told the officer, "[Y]ou're a racist, bro," the officer responded: "Yep, and I'm proud of it." He added, "Do you remember what happened in Black Hawk Down when we killed a bunch of you folk? I'm proud of that . . . . We didn't finish the job over there . . . if we had . . . you guys wouldn't be over here right now." None of the other officers present intervened or reported their colleague, according to news reports. It was not until weeks later, when cellphone footage went viral, that MPD opened an investigation, eventually firing the officer. Afterward, the City did not release evidence of the most troubling comments until required to by a public records lawsuit, nearly five years later. MPD thus missed the opportunity to send a strong message to officers, the Somali community, and the broader public that MPD does not tolerate or condone this behavior. 45