REGIME CHANGE: Toward a Postliberal Future, by Patrick J. Deneen

It isn’t easy being Patrick J. Deneen. In 2018, he published “Why Liberalism Failed,” a scathing and sweeping critique that was attentively discussed by the very people (establishment politicians, Ivy League academics, mainstream journalists) he depicted as too ruthless and arrogant to care about the problems ravaging the country: ecological degradation, economic devastation, social isolation, deaths of despair. Magazine sections were given over to debating Deneen’s thesis; Barack Obama promoted the book on his reading list. Multiple articles in this newspaper parsed his argument, precisely because it voiced some of the discontent that had helped propel Donald J. Trump into the highest office.

Yet if Deneen’s new book, “Regime Change,” is any indication, he and his fellow social conservatives are feeling as persecuted as ever. Never mind that the Supreme Court effectively overturned Roe v. Wade last year, and statewide bans on abortions are proceeding apace. Or that red-state lawmakers are removing books on the barest pretext that they might offend conservative sensibilities. In “Regime Change,” Deneen, who teaches political theory at the University of Notre Dame, depicts the current dispensation as not just inadequate but unbearable — so much so that he deigns to go beyond theorizing to propose what he would like to do about it.

He spends the early chapters railing against that trusted bugaboo of right-wing pundits — academics who “veil their status” by speaking the language of egalitarianism while basking in the privilege and prestige conferred by their fancy degrees. In a particularly heated passage, he writes about how the political scientist Charles Murray, a co-author of “The Bell Curve,” notoriously linking intelligence to race and class, was invited to speak at Middlebury College in 2017 and then shouted down by protests that turned violent.

Deneen finds this hypocrisy especially galling. He points out that Middlebury is extremely expensive to attend. It is also, Deneen notes, “among the most selective schools in America — accepting only 17 percent of applicants in 2017.” (If Deneen is bothered by the fact that Notre Dame’s acceptance rate stands at 15 percent, he doesn’t say.) For a book that’s ostensibly about the oppressively liberal American political system, a surprising number of pages are devoted to the ins and outs of what happens on elite college campuses.