Three miles lie between this life and another, between their two houses, hers in downtown Plains, Ga., and his family farm in the country surrounded by peanuts planted in red clay. Three miles between the ordinary and extraordinary.

As a girl, she — Rosalynn Smith — sometimes runs away, just across the street to play with the neighbor boys, to feel what it would feel like: escape, freedom, adventure. She reads “Heidi” and “Robinson Crusoe.” She knows there must be something bigger out there. When her daddy is diagnosed with leukemia at 44, she’s 13, the oldest of four children. That’s when she’ll say her childhood ends. She takes his wishes seriously, though: She will go to college. She will try not to cry.

Some years later — four to be exact, during World War II — she notices Jimmy Carter for the first time. He’s just a picture on the wall at her friend Ruth’s farmhouse, away at the Naval Academy now. Rosalynn’s clan are better bred and more educated than the Carters, but the Carters are what you call individualists. Their mama, Lillian, comes and goes as a nurse from every home, regardless of skin color. Jimmy’s daddy, Earl, has built some sort of clay tennis court out there, puts all kinds of spin on the ball when he beats his son. The family sits and reads during dinner, sometimes not even talking to one another. Imagine that: elbow to elbow, their noses in books, Jimmy reading “War and Peace.”

Shy and introverted, Rosalynn can’t stop thinking about that picture on the wall, that uniformed Carter boy with the sweet smile who’s broken the force field and gone far away. He comes home on leave, in the summer of 1945. He’s 20, she’s 17.

Ruth conspires to have them meet, at a cleanup after some local event. Jimmy kids Rosalynn when she makes sandwiches with mismatched pieces of bread and salad dressing instead of mayonnaise. She feels, for the first time, that she can talk — really talk — to a boy, that there’s something serious but giving about him. Later, after saying goodbye, she goes to a youth meeting at church, and a car pulls up, and suddenly Jimmy Carter is walking across that lawn as if he’s in a movie scene, asking if she’d like to double-date with him, his sister and her date. They ride in the rumble seat, and years later neither will remember what movie they saw, but there was a full moon and a kiss to remember because it was not like Rosalynn Smith to let a boy kiss her on a first date.

President Jimmy Carter and Rosalynn Carter at an inaugural ball in January 1977. Marion S. Trikosko,/Universal History Archive, via Getty Images

When people will come to think of Jimmy and Rosalynn Carter’s 77-year marriage, which will take place almost exactly a year from that full moon, they will think of two as one, as a soldered single entity, never at odds, compatibly twinned shoulder to shoulder building houses or trying to eradicate Guinea worm in Africa or abiding their God at church in Plains. It will perhaps seem that Rosalynn has always been eclipsed by the public face — and later, the faint saintly glow — of Jimmy Carter. That Jimmy Carter was bound for his successes no matter who was behind him or by his side.

Nothing could be further from the truth.

When the Carter boy proposes marriage at Christmas — not long after those two atomic bombs have been dropped on Japan — she says no at first. Valedictorian of her high school class, she promised her daddy college. Love, yes, but no begins the real negotiation. Terms and expectations.

And compromise: She earns a junior college degree, then joins her new husband as a Navy wife, bouncing from coast to coast, even to Hawaii. They have a boy, and another, and eventually another. She’s in charge while he’s on subs or working on base. When Earl dies and Jimmy is called back to run the farm, she cries most of the car ride home. That’s how she remembers it, crying and yelling, too. Go back, what for? She’s so livid on that ride that she talks to Jimmy only through her oldest son, Jack.

Jack, would you tell your fath-ah. ...

Disagree as they might, their ferment and conflict proliferate into a full equal partnership. She does the books at the warehouse, explains the inner workings of their peanut business to him: how much money they have, how much credit, their next best move. When he runs for local office, she begins calling everyone in the county, straight off the voter list. He runs for governor, she goes everywhere: talks to people in fire stations and Kmarts. Rides in shrimp boats, goes up in a hot-air balloon, attends a rattlesnake roundup. People — including family — say Rosalynn, the shy introvert, is the political mastermind. He wants to do what’s right. She wants to win.

He has 2 percent name recognition entering the 1976 presidential race. She drives all over Florida, pointing herself at radio antennas, walks into each station and says, Would you like to interview the candidate’s wife? She travels to Iowa, New Hampshire, anywhere they need her, sponging the hurts and desires of America and then telling Jimmy words to say. Within another year, she’s in Washington on a cold winter morning, fussing over her hair and worrying over her 9-year-old, her youngest child, Amy, while Jimmy practices reading his Inaugural Address aloud.

It’s a rough-and-tumble ride, the presidency. For her it’s like crossing the street as a child with no idea what might be found on the other side. She adores the adventure of each day, the hard-knuckled politics of what comes next. She’s the first first lady to create her own office in the East Wing. She sits in on cabinet meetings, another first. She furthers her mental-health agenda, becomes an envoy to Central America. The press nicknames her Mrs. President, calls her Steel Magnolia. Go back and watch the clips of Morley Safer of “60 Minutes” challenging her husband’s abilities, as she smiles sphinxlike at some barbed question and offers a bromide — there’s no one better than Jimmy Carter to run this country — while the glitter in her eye says, I would like to punch your nose, Mr. Morley Safer.

Her husband is described as a mix of tenderness and detachment, as the historian Garry Wills says, his demeanor a “cooing which nonetheless suggests the proximity of lions.”

She is the lion.

When they come back to Plains — again — after four years, she is more disappointed than he. (“I’m bitter enough for both of us,” she quips to staff on Election Day when someone remarks on Jimmy’s equanimity.) There were so many programs in place, so much more to realize — it crushes her to see Ronald Reagan undo it all — and she believes, will always believe, that no one truly understood that the world was a better place with Jimmy Carter as president. He never brought his country to war; his priorities were human rights and the environment.

Of course, their last act becomes their most important: Each will say maybe it was a blessing to have four more years to add to the decades of work — from peace negotiations to disease eradication — at the Carter Center. And the public collects images of them growing old together, in each other’s company, shoulder to shoulder, circling the globe on their various missions, returning to Plains, which becomes their comfort and sanctuary, a place where they go biking or fishing together, where they collect their little miracles of small-town life. They still argue and bicker. A book they try to write together nearly ends their marriage. But by the end of each day, they’ve reconciled. She does tai chi while he reads. They tell people that some space — everyone sets their own distance — can do wonders for a marriage.

They bury her at a willow tree by a pond on the property where they’ve lived together these 43 years since the White House, roughly midway between Rosalynn Smith’s childhood house and Jimmy Carter’s farm out in those red clay fields.

Michael Paterniti, a contributing writer for the magazine, is at work on a book about the discovery of the North Pole.