Damien Cave I am an international correspondent for The New York Times based in Sydney, writing about Australia and how shifts in global power, security, technology and culture are affecting the Indo-Pacific region.

What I Cover

I spend most of my time reporting on diplomacy and security in the Indo-Pacific, as competition between the United States and China reshapes the region. One of my goals is to connect the dots with reporting and analysis from many countries — to identify and explain the motivations and trends that are creating new partnerships and divisions.

I also write about how global forces play out in families, businesses and communities, from geopolitics to other issues like immigration, demographics, climate change, technology and the tensions between traditional and modern ideas. Sometimes I gravitate to stories that might make you cry; other times, laugh.

My Background

I have spent most of the past 20 years as a correspondent for The Times. I’ve been based in Baghdad and Miami, Mexico City and Sydney, and spent lengthy stints reporting from many other places, including Lebanon, India, Taiwan, Turkey and Cuba.

In 2017, I led a team opening The Times’s new Australia bureau, covering a region where both my grandfathers served in World War II, and inspiring me to write a book — “Parenting Like an Australian: One Family’s Quest to Fight Fear and Dive into a Better, Braver Life.”

Before that, from 2014 to 2017, I was a deputy editor on the National desk, advancing the digital development of The Times, which is something I’ve tried to do in all my roles. (Early in my career, I covered technology in San Francisco for one of the Internet’s first digital magazines.)

In 2007, I was part of a team of finalists for the Pulitzer Prize in international reporting for our coverage of the war in Iraq. We also won an Overseas Press Club award that year, my second — the first one was for a humor essay about Paraguay.

I’ve always known I wanted to explore the world. I grew up in Worcester, Mass., a working-class son of liberal hippies turned conservative Christians, in a family of rich and poor, with marriages mixed across religious and ethnic lines — America in microcosm. I now feel incredibly lucky to be covering how a changing America and a changing world intersect.

Journalistic Ethics

As a Times journalist, I share the values and follow the standards of integrity outlined in The Times’s Ethical Journalism Handbook. I aim for accuracy, fairness and nuance in all of my work.

When covering sensitive topics, I do everything possible to protect sources — including sources who need to be anonymous. I also try to be transparent about where my reporting leads and rarely end an interview without asking who else I should talk to.

Having covered a fair bit of war, transnational crime, horrific natural disasters and mass violence, I work especially hard to make sure that those who are vulnerable and less familiar with the media are treated with dignity and respect throughout my reporting and writing process.

The best way to reach me is by email. If you are worried about your anonymity, send an email to me or our anonymous tips line and request my phone details so we can move the conversation to Signal, an encrypted messaging app.