There is something I’ve been hearing my entire life. “One of my life mottoes is education ends poverty.” But is that true? And if so, why aren’t we doing it? “If you educate a child, you also find a solution for poverty.” Imagine if one of the poorest countries in the world put as many kids in school as possible. What would happen to that country? [CHEERING] Here’s the thing, this place actually exists. Right now, we’re in a small town in Sierra Leone, but this is not about this town or this country. This is really about the idea that education can transform societies and create economic opportunities and Sierra Leone is the grand test of that vision. What unfolds here, I think, will help determine education policy in many other countries. It’s a gamble. I’m hoping and praying that it succeeds, but we don’t know yet. So, why is this classroom in a village in Sierra Leone overflowing with students? Well, it starts with a different student — “I’m on Harvard’s campus —” — at a different school. This is David Sengeh. He studied engineering at Harvard. “Sitting here at the M.I.T. Media Lab.” He got his Ph.D. from M.I.T. He’s an author, a musician. “Sierra Leone is known for a complicated set of sociopolitical challenges.” He worked for I.B.M. “It’s a post-civil war and post-Ebola country of rapid population growth. I will change Sierra Leone.” Then he became minister of education in Sierra Leone. “That’s what I want you to think about.” This is one of the poorest countries in the world. For decades, school fees kept millions from getting an education. But under David Sengeh’s plan, the government has increased spending on education, taking up about a fifth of the national budget. Now school is supposed to be free. “This is the most advanced and forward-looking education bill any time.” And enrollment is up 50 percent. “Hello.” “How are you?” “Good.” This is Alamatu. “This is the toilet?” Her father is dead and her mother sells peppers at the market. “And the rats and snakes, they’re a problem here.” She’s the youngest of seven siblings. “This is where you cook?” “Yes.” They can’t afford electricity. Yet Alamatu is thriving in school. That’s because of Sengeh’s plan. It’s supposed to pay for tuition, books and for some, school meals. “Has it changed your life?” “Yes. Totally changed my life.” “Your mother got no education. She never went to school at all?” “She never went to school at all.” She’s the first girl in her family to learn to read and write. “I don’t want to be like my parents. Because they are suffering a lot for income. So I think that if I become a lawyer, I will change my family background.” I’ve learned that there’s often a huge gap between policies pronounced in the capital and what actually happens at the grass roots. So if we see a few kids who are school age and not in uniform, and just clearly out of school, let’s just — Do you want to hold on and stop? Let’s go talk to them. “I’m a journalist. Are you harvesting palm nuts to make oil? And are you in school?” “Yeah.” “In primary school? Do you have to pay school fees?” “Yeah.” “What happens to children who do not pay school fees?” “And the bursar has a cane or what?” “Cane.” “A cane. And how many strokes?” “Six.” “When the names are called, how many children out of the 52 are beaten?” “25.” “So almost half of the kids are beaten every week for not paying the school fees? You know, what do you make of that?” “My immediate response is it’s painful, because it violates everything that we’ve been working for. It makes me want to cry. It’s horrible.” “Almost every kid I spoke to, there was some kind of illegal fee, whether a school fee, or a book fee, or a lunch fee.” “I think change is hard and change is possible.” Changing a policy doesn’t change a culture. Sengeh banned corporal punishment, but everywhere I went, I saw canes in classrooms. “So this is a cane. So even the sight of this thing, this get these kids conform. But it’s a tool.” So why are teachers beating kids? For some, it’s discipline. For others, it’s a punishment for not paying fees, fees that shouldn’t exist, because many teachers traditionally relied on school fees for income. “How are you teachers paid? You need to survive too. You need to eat.” “The only way you survive because we take a little from the pupils.” “Is that enough to pay the community teachers, enough to survive?” “No, no, no, no, no.” “When people face challenges, justified challenges, poverty, they can, in turn, justify their own wrong action. Those don’t get changed by laws within a few days.” I’m not showing you this because I think Sengeh and his colleagues are hypocrites who were lying about the policy. In fact, it’s the opposite. I see real success here. They’re trying and they recognize that they need to not only increase enrollment, but also focus on outcomes. That’s the path to learning, and eventually to prosperity. I’ve seen it before in South Korea, in Bangladesh, in China. But in many countries, we’re facing a learning crisis. It has proven easy to get more kids into school, but those kids often aren’t actually learning anything. Donors and politicians love to cut ribbons and put plaques on buildings, things voters can see. But changing a culture, that’s hard. Getting teachers to show up, that’s hard. And above all, investing in what happens inside those schools, actual learning, that’s really hard. “22 percent of our budget in Sierra Leone goes to education. We don’t think about this as a public expense. We think about this as an investment. You have to invest in people and investment takes time.” Whether in South Dakota or Sierra Leone, education remains the best path out of poverty. But that path is still too often broken for the kids who need it most. Fixing it is really difficult, but that’s what I see happening here. And I returned from one of the poorest countries on Earth and see lessons for the world. I feel hope.