Former President Donald Trump and President Joe Biden. Getty Images, AP

President Joe Biden and former President Donald Trump both secured enough delegates to become their parties’ presumptive nominees for president, setting up a rematch in November's general election.

Biden reached the magic number with an allocation of delegates from Georgia — a battleground state that was crucial in his 2020 general election victory. And Trump secured the GOP nomination after winning Washington state's primary.

Here’s where CNN has projected winners so far:

Biden will win the Democratic primaries in Georgia, Mississippi and Washington state.

will win the Democratic primaries in Georgia, Mississippi and Washington state. Trump will win the Republican primaries in Georgia, Mississippi and Washington state.

Results still outstanding: Hawaii Republicans are holding caucuses which will end at 2 a.m. ET. Voting is also wrapping up tonight in the primary for Democrats Abroad, the official arm of the Democratic Party for Americans living overseas.

Biden looks to rematch: The president said in a statement that he is honored to become his party’s presumptive nominee. He warned that “freedom and democracy” are at risk and that Trump poses a threat to America as he turns his attention to the general election. “Voters now have a choice to make about the future of our country,” Biden said.

Trump slams Biden: The former president slammed his opponent in a video posted on social media after becoming the presumptive GOP nominee and said now “we have to get to work to beat Joe Biden.” He emphasized the importance of the election in November, telling his supporters that “this vote is going to be the most important vote you’ve ever cast.”

But there’s a long road ahead: The 2024 matchup will be tied for the longest general election campaign in the past half-century. GOP challenger Nikki Haley dropped her primary bid with 244 days to go until the November election. The 2004 general election between Republican incumbent George W. Bush and Democratic challenger John Kerry also began 244 days before Election Day, according to a Pew Research Center analysis.

Here's a look at the latest delegate count:

Democrat:

Biden: 2,099 (The president needed 1,968 to become the Democratic presumptive nominee)

Uncommitted: 20

Jason Palmer: 3

Republican:

Trump: 1,228 (The former president needed at least 1,215 delegates to win the GOP nomination)

Remember: Neither Trump nor Biden will officially become the nominee until the national conventions vote this summer.