Former New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie takes the stage for a debate hosted by NewsNation at the University of Alabama Moody Music Hall on Wednesday in Tuscaloosa, Alabama. Justin Sullivan/Getty Images

Former New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie slammed his fellow GOP presidential candidates Wednesday for not discussing former President Donald Trump on the debate stage.

"The truth needs to be spoken. He is unfit," Christie said in regard to Trump.

He referred to the former president as Voldemort — the antagonist in J.K. Rowling's series "Harry Potter," who is also known as "he-who-shall-not-be-named."

"The fact is when you go and you say the truth about somebody who is a dictator, a bully who has taken shots at everybody — whether they've given him great service or not over time — who dares to disagree with him, then I understand why these three are timid to say anything about it," Christie said.

Christie noted in the 17 minutes before he had the opportunity to speak in the debate, his rivals were "acting as if the race is between the four of us."

"The fifth guy, who doesn't have the guts to show up and stand here, he's the one who, as you just put it, is ahead in the polls," he said.

Christie said those poll numbers prove that "there is no bigger issue in this race than Donald Trump."

Trump's legal challenges: Trump faces 91 criminal charges across four indictments. He was indicted by a federal grand jury in the special counsel’s investigation into the aftermath of the 2020 election and was charged alongside 18 others for efforts to overturn his 2020 election defeat in Georgia.

He also pleaded not guilty in June to dozens of federal counts related to the special counsel investigation into the mishandling of classified documents. In New York, a hush money payment to an adult film star resulted in his indictment by a Manhattan grand jury over his alleged role in the scheme. That marked the first time in American history that a current or former president was criminally charged.

Trump and his company deny any wrongdoing or criminality in all matters, state and federal, and he has aggressively maintained his innocence. As a defendant in multiple cases, the former president faces a busy trial calendar in 2024 at the same time he participates in Republican primaries.

CNN’s Dan Berman and Ali Main contributed reporting to this post.