Republican presidential candidate and former U.S. Ambassador to the United Nations Nikki Haley hosts a campaign event in Houston, Texas, U.S. March 4, 2024. REUTERS/Callaghan O'Hare/File Photo Purchase Licensing Rights New Tab , opens new tab

Item 1 of 7 Republican presidential candidate and former U.S. Ambassador to the United Nations Nikki Haley hosts a campaign event in Houston, Texas, U.S. March 4, 2024. REUTERS/Callaghan O'Hare/File Photo

March 5 (Reuters) - Nikki Haley is the only Republican candidate left in the battle against Donald Trump for the party's nomination to take on Democratic President Joe Biden in November's U.S. presidential election

Here are the Republican Party's two remaining candidates:

DONALD TRUMP

Advertisement · Scroll to continue

Trump, 77, has said the criminal charges he faces are part of a political witch hunt designed to keep him from winning, a claim the U.S. Justice Department has denied.

Some of his legal challenges have reached the Supreme Court, which ruled that he remains eligible for the ballot following the Jan. 6, 2021 attack on the U.S. Capitol and agreed to weigh his claim of presidential immunity in coming weeks.

Advertisement · Scroll to continue

Ad Break Coming Up NEXT Stay Next About Connatix V481126 1/1 00:14 Solar storm: what causes Northern Lights? Skip Ad Continue watching Solar storm: what causes Northern Lights? after the ad Visit Advertiser website GO TO PAGE

Trump has made immigration his top domestic campaign issue, declaring he would carry out mass deportations, create holding camps and utilize the National Guard. He would also end birthright citizenship and expand a travel ban on people from certain countries. However, his opposition to a bipartisan deal in the Senate that would tighten immigration enforcement has stalled, if not killed, the bill.

He has repeated calls to impose the death penalty on drug dealers, said other alleged criminals could be shot dead, and suggested he would unilaterally send federal troops into Democratic-run localities.

Advertisement · Scroll to continue Report this ad

On abortion, Trump has taken credit for the U.S. Supreme Court ruling overturning Roe v. Wade, but he has criticized some Republican-led states' six-week abortion bans. He said he supported in vitro fertilization (IVF) treatment access after an Alabama court ruling curtailed access in the state and raised questions about reproductive rights.

He has promised other sweeping changes, including eliminating Obamacare health insurance and undoing much of the Biden administration’s work to fight climate change.

NIKKI HALEY

A former South Carolina governor and Trump's ambassador to the United Nations, Haley, 52, has emphasized her relative youth compared to Biden, 81, and Trump, as well as her background as the daughter of Indian immigrants.

She has gained a reputation in the Republican Party as a solid conservative who could credibly tackle issues of gender and race, but she trails Trump in the polls, drawing 19% support among Republicans in the Reuters/Ipsos survey, and has winning one nominating race, in Washington, D.C.

Trump has increasingly targeted her, lobbing racist attacks on her ethnicity and amplifying false claims about her eligibility for the White House despite her being born in South Carolina.

Haley, in turn, has sharpened her attacks on Trump, calling him "diminished" and "unhinged" and arguing he is too chaotic and divisive to be effective.

Haley has said she would pardon him if he is convicted on federal criminal charges.

She also backs changes to Social Security and Medicare safety net programs for seniors and vowed to dramatically reduce the size of the U.S. government by shifting some federal programs to states.

She has said she personally opposes abortion and has sought national consensus on the issue. On IVF, she has said that she believes frozen embryos are babies but that she backs parents' rights over them.

Haley has called for making some tax cuts permanent and eliminating the federal gas tax.

Get weekly news and analysis on the U.S. elections and how it matters to the world with the newsletter On the Campaign Trail. Sign up here.

Compiled by Susan Heavey and Katharine Jackson; Editing by Jonathan Oatis and Lisa Shumaker

Our Standards: The Thomson Reuters Trust Principles. New Tab , opens new tab