The New York Skyline and the Empire State Building are seen during the pass of a winter storm in Weehawken, New Jersey, U.S., January 10, 2024. REUTERS/Eduardo Munoz/File Photo Purchase Licensing Rights New Tab , opens new tab

WASHINGTON, Feb 7 (Reuters) - The inflation-adjusted wealth of white households in the U.S. grew faster than that of Black and Hispanic households from the start of 2019 through the third quarter of last year, with Black households in particular now worse off than they were before the pandemic, a New York Fed study has concluded.

The study used information gathered by the U.S. Federal Reserve on the value of household assets including stocks and real estate, as well as liabilities owed on mortgages and other loans, and adjusted those values for inflation.

Advertisement · Scroll to continue

The result showed the net worth of white families as of the third quarter of last year was 28% higher than it was at the start of 2019, that of Hispanic households was 20% higher, and that of Black families about 1.5% lower than it was before the pandemic.

Reuters Graphics

New York Fed researchers in a blog post released on Wednesday attributed the outcome to changes in the value of financial assets, with the comparatively larger holdings of equities by white households apparently driving stronger wealth gains.

Advertisement · Scroll to continue

Black household wealth, the research noted, was more heavily concentrated in retirement holdings.

While all groups saw gains in net worth through the worst of the pandemic in 2020 and 2021, when federal fiscal programs offered expansive unemployment and other benefits, subsequent declines amid rising inflation and sagging financial markets hit Black families the hardest and pushed their net worth back below the 2019 level.

Ad Break Coming Up NEXT Stay Next About Connatix V481126 1/1 00:13 Solar storm: what causes Northern Lights? Skip Ad Continue watching Solar storm: what causes Northern Lights? after the ad Visit Advertiser website GO TO PAGE

The research is the latest look at how households fared through the pandemic and into the current economic expansion, and pointed to the fact that the trillions of dollars in fiscal spending offered to support families through the health crisis does not appear to have produced lasting changes in the distribution of wealth among major demographic groups.

Advertisement · Scroll to continue Report this ad

Get weekly news and analysis on the U.S. elections and how it matters to the world with the newsletter On the Campaign Trail. Sign up here.

Reporting by Howard Schneider; Editing by Andrea Ricci and Chizu Nomiyama

Our Standards: The Thomson Reuters Trust Principles. New Tab , opens new tab

Save Share Twitter

Facebook

Linkedin

Email

Link Purchase Licensing Rights