Maximilian Krah, Alternative for Germany (AfD) party member and member of the European Parliament of the Identity and Democracy (ID) group, waves his hand after a speech during the European election assembly 2023 of the Alternative for Germany (AfD) in Magdeburg, Germany, July 29, 2023.... Purchase Licensing Rights New Tab , opens new tab

Item 1 of 2 Maximilian Krah, Alternative for Germany (AfD) party member and member of the European Parliament of the Identity and Democracy (ID) group, waves his hand after a speech during the European election assembly 2023 of the Alternative for Germany (AfD) in Magdeburg, Germany, July 29, 2023. REUTERS/Annegret Hilse/files

March 25 (Reuters) - Anticipating a populist surge when Europeans go to the polls in June, anti-discrimination organisations on Monday urged the bloc's institutions to put equality policies at the top of their agenda once a new parliament is elected.

"The EU is far from being a 'Union of Equality' - this is work in progress, and right now, we witness rising backlash, racial injustice, inequality and discrimination," the nine signatories said in a joint statement. "This needs urgent attention."

Advertisement · Scroll to continue

The signatories include large rights associations such as the European Disability Forum, the European Network Against Racism and LGBTI advocacy group ILGA-Europe.

They said there had been advances during the current parliament, such as the appointment of an Equality Commissioner, a directive to combat violence against women, and an action plan against racism.

But they said more work was needed to "guarantee equality of treatment regardless of who you are or where you live in the EU", and called for comprehensive legal protection against discrimination.

Advertisement · Scroll to continue

European Parliament elections will take place on June 6-9. Its 720 lawmakers, together with EU governments, pass new policies and laws.

The election is expected to yield more seats for populist , right-wing parties, and losses for centre-left and green parties, according to opinion polls. Far-right Identity and Democracy could become the third largest group in parliament.

Despite the anticipated populist surge, the centre-right European People's Party (EPP) has kept a lead. Still, securing a majority might be a challenge , possibly forcing it into policy trade-offs to win the votes needed.

Ad Break Coming Up NEXT Stay Next About Connatix V481126 1/1 00:15 Swiss Eurovision winner Nemo lands in Zurich Skip Ad Continue watching Swiss Eurovision winner Nemo lands in Zurich after the ad Visit Advertiser website GO TO PAGE

The organisations said it was crucial to strengthen the European Commission's services on equality, non-discrimination and anti-racism, and guarantee the next EU budget properly funds civil society organisations working on these issues.

"It is also fundamental to ensure staff working at EU institutions properly reflects the European population, not only in terms of nationality but also in terms of diversity," they said, demanding consultation with rights associations during the decision-making process.

Advertisement · Scroll to continue Report this ad

Coming soon: Get the latest news and expert analysis about the state of the global economy with Reuters Econ World. Sign up here.

Reporting by Catarina Demony in Lisbon; Editing by Mark Potter

Our Standards: The Thomson Reuters Trust Principles. New Tab , opens new tab

Save Share Twitter

Facebook

Linkedin

Email

Link Purchase Licensing Rights